5.

"P-R I" Planned Residential District I. The purpose of this district is to encourage planned developments as a means of creating a superior living environment through unified planning and building operations at lower residential densities. The regulations of the district are designed to encourage variety in housing needed to meet changing housing demands and to provide adequate community facilities well-located with respect to needs; to protect the natural beauty of the landscape; to encourage preservation and more efficient use of open space; and to offer an opportunity for design flexibility and encourage innovations which may result in improved relationships between uses of different types and between land uses and transportation facilities.

6. "P-R II" Planned Residential District II. The purpose of this district is to encourage planned developments as a means of creating a superior living environment through unified planning and building operations at higher residential densities. The regulations of the district are designed to encourage variety in housing needed to meet changing housing demands and to provide adequate community facilities well-located with respect to needs; to protect the natural beauty of the landscape; to encourage preservation and more efficient use of open space; to offer an opportunity for design flexibility; and encourage innovations which may result in improved relationships between uses of different types and between land uses and transportation facilities.

7.

"P-C" Planned Commercial District. The purpose of this district is to provide for attractive and efficient retail shopping and personal service facilities of integrated design in appropriate locations to serve residential neighborhoods. It is intended that the district shall be laid out and developed as a unit according to an approved plan so that the purpose of the district may be accomplished. The district is adaptable to shopping centers of various sizes, as well as development of general business properties where the use of shared parking and access, together with careful site planning, will produce a stronger commercial area.

8.

"P-I" Planned Industrial District. The purpose of this district is to establish an industrial environment for certain types of manufacturing, business or industrial uses which are compatible with any adjacent land use by performance, appearance, and general operating characteristics. The regulations of the district are designed so that all operations and activities, specifically including but not limited to, the storage of materials of all kinds are conducted within a building or appropriately screened.

9.

"SRR" Special Residential Revitalization District. The special residential revitalization district (SRR) is established in recognition that developments containing both residential and commercial uses can create an appealing and vital urban environment when carefully designed. Developments approved for this district shall be designed to eliminate potential use conflicts through creative design methods. The SRR district allows for mixing residential environments with workplaces and services. Development in the SRR district must accommodate transportation systems, surrounding environments and pedestrian movements.

10.

"R-MU" Mixed Use Residential District. The purpose of this district is to accommodate, encourage and promote innovatively designed developments involving neighborhood-serving residential and commercial land uses, which together form an attractive and harmonious unit of the city. The regulations of this district are intended to allow for developments that are intended by their size and nature of operation to provide service to a neighborhood. It is intended that the district regulations permit uses that are compatible with the residential areas that the uses serve, and allow flexibility and encourage more creative, efficient and aesthetically desirable design and placement of land uses.

11.

"G-MU" General Mixed Use District. The purpose of this district is to accommodate, encourage and promote innovatively designed developments involving the combining and mixing of uses allowed in various zoning districts with appropriate regulations, which together form an attractive and harmonious unit of the city. The regulations of this district are intended to allow for large-scale developments that are able to function as individual neighborhoods or an integrated collection (two or more) of individual neighborhoods supported by civic, commercial and recreational uses; as small- scale developments requiring flexibility because of unique design characteristics; or as transitional areas between dissimilar land uses. It is intended that the district regulations permit flexibility and encourage more creative, efficient and aesthetically desirable design and placement of land uses.

12.

"I-MU" Mixed Use Industrial District. The purpose of this district is to accommodate, encourage and promote innovatively designed developments involving diverse commercial and industrial land uses, which together form an attractive and harmonious unit of the city. The regulations of this district are intended to allow for developments with good access and high visibility that are designed to create compatibility between diverse uses and adjacent zoning districts. It is intended that the district regulations permit uses serving the entire community, and allow flexibility and encourage more creative, efficient and aesthetically desirable design and placement of land uses.

13. "NOS" Natural Open Space District.

A.

The purpose of this district is to preserve and protect natural resources and features including, but not limited to the mountain, hillside, arroyo, bosque and desert flatland areas within the city and to promote the conservation and restoration of these areas within and adjacent to urban and suburban development.

B. The regulations of this district are designed to protect ecologically sensitive lands and to prohibit those activities that would adversely affect the environmental characteristics of the district, while still permitting passive recreational use of the land. This district is also intended to preserve land that, if disturbed, may be susceptible to flooding and soil erosion due to steep slopes and runoff.

C. Property located within this district shall remain undeveloped, except as allowed in accordance with this title.

14. "URD" Urban Reserve District.

A. Urban Reserve District means an area that has development value with open space opportunities. The land may not be available for development either due to a lack of necessary infrastructure to support development or because the land is owned by the city.

B. Land may be zoned URD as a means of preserving the land for sustainable, transit served, form based code development and redevelopment when such land becomes necessary to serve growth in the region. Portions of URD zoned land may have intrinsic value as open space and may contain such features as scenic corridors, view sheds, arroyos, steep slopes, or protected habitat that should remain in its natural state once development occurs.

(Ord. 16915 § 3, 2008; Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17306, § 3, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 17490, § 3, 1-25-2011; Ord. No. 17547, § 2, 5-3-2011; Ord. No. 18531, § 3, 6-28-2016)

20.06.030 - Official zoning map.

A. The boundaries of the zoning districts herein established are shown on a set of maps known and designated as the "Official Zoning Map Series, City of El Paso, Texas." These maps shall be kept and maintained on a geographical information system ("GIS") or other digital cartography system by the planning division. It shall be the duty of the planning official to keep the official zoning map series up to date, clearly indicating all changes as soon as practicable after said changes occur. These maps shall be available to the public for inspection. Copies of superseded prints of the official zoning map series shall be kept for historical reference.

B. The boundaries of the districts are as shown on the original "Official Zoning Map Series, City of El Paso, Texas," dated June 5, 2007, and which are adopted and made a part of this chapter by reference as if the districts, notations and information shown thereon were fully contained and described within this title; and any amendments made thereto after the effective date of these regulations. Copies of any ordinances, plans or other documents effecting amendments to the official zoning map shall also be maintained by the planning division and shall be available to the public for inspection. (Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17442, § 18, 10-26-2010)

20.06.040 - District boundaries.

Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various zoning districts as shown on the official zoning map series, the following rules shall apply:

A. A letter and/or number combination shown on the official zoning map series shall indicate that the regulations pertaining to the zoning district of that letter and/or number combination extend throughout the whole area within those zoning district boundary lines, except as otherwise provided by this section.

B. Zoning district boundaries approximately following (adjacent to or within) an alley, canal, lateral, drainage right-of-way, railroad right-of-way, railroad easement or street right-of-way, shall be construed to follow the centerline of the alley, canal, lateral, drainage right-of-way, railroad right-of-way, railroad easement or street right-of-way, and shall be so designated on the official zoning map series.

C. Zoning district boundaries approximately following (adjacent to) a platted lot line, tract line, survey line, or other jurisdictional boundary line, shall be construed to follow the platted lot line, tract line, survey line, or other jurisdictional boundary line, and shall be so designated on the official zoning map series.

D. Where the actual location of an alley, canal, lateral, drainage right-of-way, railroad right-of-way, railroad easement, street right-of-way, platted lot line, tract line, survey line, or other jurisdictional boundary line varies slightly from its location as shown on the official zoning map series, the actual location of the alley, canal, lateral, drainage right-of-way, railroad right-of-way, railroad easement, street right-of-way, platted lot line, tract line, survey line, or other jurisdictional boundary line shall control.

E. Zoning district boundaries dividing a platted lot or tract shall be construed as being located as shown on the official zoning map series, and distances shall be determined by the scale of the map.

F.

Where a property has been or may hereafter be divided into platted blocks and lots, the zoning district boundaries approximately following (adjacent to) a platted lot line shall be construed to follow the platted lot line and shall be so designated on the official zoning map series.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.06.050 - Amendment to official zoning map.

Amendments to the official zoning map series shall be accomplished using the procedures that apply to map amendments in this title, as set forth in Chapter 20.04 (Administrative Provisions).

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. 16653 8 2 (part), 2007)

20.06.060 - Omitted land.

20.06.060 - Omitted land.

If, because of error or omission in the official zoning map series, any property in the corporate limits is not shown as being in a zoning district, or if for any other reason the zoning cannot be properly determined on any property in the corporate limits by the zoning administrator, such property shall be classified as R-F (Ranch and Farm) zoning district until changed by amendment pursuant to Chapter 20.04 (Administrative Provisions) of this title.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.06.070 - Annexed properties.

A. Any property hereafter annexed to the corporate limits shall be zoned in accordance with state law and this title. The city council and city plan commission may jointly consider, recommend and act, designating the zoning classification for the proposed annexed parcels proposal, at the same time of the public hearings required for annexation; provided, that all procedures required for amendments pursuant to Chapter 20.04 (Administrative Provisions) of this title and state law are complied with. If the property is annexed into the corporate limits without city council action designating a zoning classification for the property, the property shall be automatically zoned as R-F (Ranch and Farm) zoning district, and the zoning map revised accordingly, until changed by amendment pursuant to Chapter 20.04 (Administrative Provisions) of this title.

B. The establishment of any nonconforming situations for any development or use of land existing on any parcel on or before initiation of annexation proceedings by the city shall be subject to the requirements of Chapter 20.22 (Nonconforming Situations) of this title.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.06.075 - Annexation procedures.

A.

Annexation of property shall follow the procedures stated in Chapter 43 of the Local Government Code.

1. Application. The owner(s) of a tract of land, or the owner's agent if authorized in writing, who desires that the tract be annexed into the corporate limits of the city, shall submit an annexation application, using the application form prescribed by the planning and inspections department to the planning and inspections department. However, if the proposed annexation is a result of an annexation petition granted by city council, no application shall be required, but the petitioners shall submit all other information and documentation required in this subsection.

a. The applicant shall also submit along with the application, the following:

(1) Legal description of the property.

(2)

A survey and metes and bounds description of the property, sealed by a registered public surveyor licensed in the State of Texas.

(3)

A digital copy of a general development plan drawn at a scale of at least 1″ = 50′ showing:

(a) The boundaries of the property.

(b) Location of existing buildings and structures.

(c)

General arrangement of existing and proposed land uses, including any zoning proposed, and including but not limited to, parks, schools, public facilities and civic places sites; open space, trails, streets, bikeways, major drainage ways and transit corridors.

(d)

The proposed density expressed in units per acre and population by land use projected for the next ten years.

(e)

Layout and relationship of the proposed development to surrounding land uses, including zoning.

(f) Other submittal requirements as specified in state law and municipal ordinances or regulations.

(4)

A certification from a title company authorized to do business in the State of Texas that the applicant is the owner of the property.

(5) Application fee as adopted by city council. Annexations as a result of a petition shall also be required to file a processing fee.

b.

The planning and inspections department shall review the application and determine whether the application is complete. If the application is not complete, the application will be returned to the applicant with a statement of what information is missing.

2.

Annexation policy. The completed application shall be reviewed to determine whether the proposed annexation complies with the requirements of the City's annexation policy. If the proposed annexation complies with the annexation policy, then the application shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 43 of the Local Government Code. If the proposed annexation does not comply the with annexation policy, then the applicant shall be advised of the reasons why and the application process shall end. An applicant may appeal to the city council a determination that an application does not comply with the annexation policy. If an applicant wishes to appeal a determination that the application does not meet the requirements of the annexation policy, then the applicant shall submit to the director of the planning and inspections department a notice of appeal. Upon receipt of notice of appeal and as soon as possible under the circumstances, the director of the planning and inspections department shall

place the appeal on the city council agenda. City council shall review the proposed annexation to determine whether it is in compliance with the policy, or if there are extraordinary circumstances which merit that the property be annexed. If city council determines that the property should be annexed, then the director for the planning and inspections department shall continue with processing the application in accordance to state law.

3. Service agreement. Each annexation shall include a service agreement which shall establish the terms and conditions under which the land shall be annexed into the city. The service agreement will include a service plan in accordance with Chapter 43 of the Local Government Code. Once the terms and conditions of the service agreement have been determined, the service agreement shall be forwarded to city council for approval. If approved, the service agreement shall be attached to the ordinance annexing the area. Upon city council approval of the service agreement, city council shall direct the deputy director for the planning and inspections department to prepare an ordinance annexing the area in accordance with Chapter 43 of the Texas Local Government Code.

4. Public hearings. All public hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures of Chapter 43 of the Texas Local Government Code, or any successor statute. The proposed service agreement prepared by the director for the planning and inspections department must be made available for public inspection and explained to the inhabitants of the area at the public hearing. The plan may be amended through negotiation at the hearing, but the provision of any service may not be deleted.

5. Procedures after annexation. If city council approves the annexation ordinance, the director of the planning and inspections department shall prepare for the mayor's signature a letter, including as attachments certified copies of documents showing the change in boundaries of the city in addition to the change in boundaries to the city's ETJ, which shall be sent to the county clerk within thirty days of annexation.

6. The city clerk shall send certified copies of the annexation ordinance to the Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts, Sales Tax Division notifying the comptroller of the change in city boundaries. The director of the planning and inspections department shall send certified letters notifying the entities listed here of the change in city boundaries:

a. United States Bureau of the Census, Boundary and Annexation Survey.

b. Texas Department of Transportation, Planning and Program Division.

c.

Texas Commission on Fire Protection.

d.

Texas Department of Insurance.

e. El Paso County Tax Assessor.

f. El Paso County Commission.

g. El Paso Central Appraisal District.

h. Any effected school district, as described in Section 43.905, Effect of Annexation on Operation of School District, of the Local Government Code.

i. Any other effected public entity, as defined in Section 43.9051, Notification of Public Entities, of the Local Government Code.

(Ord. No. 18972, § 1, 9-3-2019)

Editor's note— Ord. No. 18972, § 1, adopted Sept. 3, 2019, repealed the former § 20.06.075, and enacted a new § 20.06.075 as set out herein. The former § 20.06.075 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 17195, § 1, adopted Sept. 15, 2009.

20.06.080 - Compliance with district standards and use regulations.

All property within the corporate limits shall be located within one of the zoning districts described herein, and shall meet and conform to all requirements of those districts and shall meet any applicable performance standards (supplemental use regulations) set forth in this title. These performance standards shall apply whether or not a reference to such standards is identified in the Table of Permissible Uses under Chapter 20.08 (Permissible Uses) of this title. Except where indicated otherwise, the uses permitted in each zoning district shall be limited to those specifically enumerated. Unless the contrary is clear from the context of the lists or other regulations of this title, uses not specifically listed are prohibited.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

Chapter 20.08 - PERMISSIBLE USES

20.08.010 - Uses permitted by district.

No land shall hereafter be used, and no building or structure shall hereafter be erected, altered, or converted, which is arranged or designed or used for other than those uses specified as permitted uses in the zoning district in which it is located, according to the Table of Permissible Uses found in Appendix A, as adopted in its entirety, incorporated herein by reference, and in accordance with the provisions of this title.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. No. 19244, § 10, 10-12-2021)

20.08.020 - Interpretative provisions.

A.

When used in connection with a particular use in the Table of Permissible Uses, the designations shall have the following connotations.

1.

Permitted Use. A "P" in a cell shall indicate that a use is allowed by right in the respective zoning district, and shall be subject to the general restrictions and performance standards found in Chapter 20.10 (Supplemental Use Regulations) and other applicable regulations of this title.

2. Accessory Use. An "A" in a cell shall indicate that a use is allowed by right when it is incidental to a permitted use in the respective zoning district, and shall be subject to the general restrictions and performance standards found in Chapter 20.10 (Supplemental Use Regulations) and other applicable regulations of this title.

3. Special Permit Use. An "S" in a cell shall indicate that a use is only allowed by special permit with a detailed site development plan approval in the respective zoning district obtained from the city council in accordance with Chapter 20.04 (Administrative Provisions), and shall be subject to the general restrictions and performance standards found in Chapter 20.10 (Supplemental Use Regulations) and other applicable regulations of this title.

4. Restricted Use. A "D" in a cell shall indicate that a use is allowed in a special purpose district, excluding the R-F Ranch and Farm District, following detailed site development plan approval in accordance with Chapter 20.04 (Administrative Provisions), and shall be subject to the general restrictions and performance standards found in Chapter 20.10 (Supplemental Use Regulations) and other applicable regulations in this title.

5.

Mixed Use. A "Z" in a cell shall indicate that a use is allowed in a mixed use district (RMU, GMU, or IMU) as authorized by the City Council with specific use limitations and development standards, following approval of a master zoning plan in accordance with Chapter 20.04 (Administrative Provisions), and shall be subject to the general restrictions and performance standards found in Chapter 20.10 (Supplemental Use Regulations) and other applicable regulations of this title.

6. Special Exception Use. An "E" in a cell shall indicate that a use is only allowed by special exception in the respective zoning district obtained from the Zoning Board of Adjustment in accordance with Chapter 20.04 (Administrative Provisions), and shall be subject to the general restrictions and performance standards found in Chapter 20.10 (Supplemental Use Regulations) and other applicable regulations of this title.

7. Uses Not Allowed. An "X" in a cell shall indicate that a use is not allowed in the respective zoning district.

8. Supplemental Use Regulations. The reference to a supplemental standard in any cell shall mean that the use in a respective zoning district is subject to additional standards and requirements found in Chapter 20.10 (Supplemental Use Regulations) of this title. The specific section number of the standard shall be noted in the column titled "Supplemental Standards." Provided, however, that any applicable performance or supplemental standard within Chapter 20.10 (Supplemental Use Regulations) of this title applying to a use shall be required whether or not references incorrectly or omitted from the Table of Permissible Uses.

B.

A use that may be interpreted to be permitted under more than one categorical or use description in the Table of Permissible Uses shall be required to satisfy the requirements of the most restrictive zoning district in which the use is allowed.

C. A use particularly identified, whether or not the use may be interpreted to be permitted under more than one categorical or use description in the Table of Permissible Uses due to function or type, shall satisfy the requirements of the zoning district in which the use is particularly identified.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. No. 19244, § 11, 10-12-2021)

20.08.030 - Permissible uses.

A. The zoning districts described in this chapter group together those uses that are reasonably compatible with one another according to their normal characteristics of operation in order to achieve the following:

1. To permit, in connection with these uses, those customary and necessary accessory activities that are incidental to the principal use;

2. To permit certain other uses that may be established in some situations and subject to specific conditions so that such special uses will also be compatible with the uses allowed;

3. To promote orderly, timely, economical growth and to recognize current land use conditions;

4. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for development to meet the present and future growth needs of the city, with allowance for diversity of sites;

5.

To protect use areas, as far as possible, against heavy and unnecessary through traffic;

6. To protect use areas against pollution, environmental hazards and other objectionable influences;

ND

7.

To protect use areas against congestion, as far as possible, by managing the density of population in and around them;

8.

To provide for privacy and access of light and air, as far as possible, through controls over the spacing and height of buildings and other structures;

9. To promote the most appropriate use of land to achieve stability of development, to protect the character of the districts, to conserve the value of land and buildings, and to protect the tax base;

10. To promote the most efficient use of public facilities and services;

11. To protect against fire and explosions and other safety hazards;

12. To provide for fire and other emergency access;

13.

To accommodate use activities and operations whose external physical effects are restricted to the area of the zoning district, and in no manner affect in a detrimental way any of the surrounding zoning districts.

B.

The Table of Permissible Uses shall be used in conjunction with the terms and definitions as set forth in Chapter 20.02 (General Provisions and

Definitions) of this title. The uses are assigned different categorical descriptions in the table for illustrative purposes only, as shown below.

1.0 Agricultural and related operations 2.0 Commercial, storage and processing 3.0 Educational, institutional and social uses 4.0 Office and research services 5.0 Manufacturing, processing and assembling 6.0 Medical and related uses 7.0 Mining and quarrying operations 8.0 Motor vehicle sale and service operations 9.0 Parking and loading 10.0 Personal services 11.0 Recreation, amusement and entertainment 12.0 Repair services 13.0 Residential 14.0 Sales, retail and wholesale 15.0 Signs 16.0 Temporary uses 17.0 Towers and related structures 18.0 Transportation related uses 19.0 Utility and miscellaneous governmental uses 20.0 Overlay designations

C. Table of Permissible Uses. Appendix A.

(Ord. 16761 § 1 (part), 2007; Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 18134, § 2, 3-4-2014; Ord. No. 18218, § 2, 7-29-2014; Ord. No. 18241, § 2, 9-9-2014)

20.08.040 - Classification of new or unlisted uses.

It is recognized that new types of land use will develop and forms of land use not listed in any respective zoning district within the Table of Permissible Uses (Appendix A) may seek to locate and operate in the city. In order to provide for such changes and contingencies, a determination as to the appropriate classification of any new or unlisted form of land use shall be made as follows:

A. The zoning administrator shall upon a written request for interpretation of any interested party and pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 20.04 (Administrative Review Procedures), make a determination within which zoning district the new or unlisted use should be allowed. Any request for an interpretation shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount paid for a zoning determination, and shall include a written statement of facts

listing the nature of the use and whether it involves dwelling activity, sales, processing, type of product, storage, and amount or nature thereof, enclosed or open storage, anticipated employment, transportation requirements, the amount of noise, odor, fumes, toxic material and vibration likely to be generated and the general requirements for public utilities such as water and sanitary sewer.

B. The zoning administrator shall review the request determine if the new or unlisted use is sufficiently similar to a use already allowed within the Table of Permissible Uses and shall determine within which zoning district the new or unlisted use should be allowed. A new or unlisted use shall be classified with other similar listed uses and shall be permitted in the same zoning district(s). The nature of the new or unlisted use and its compatibility with the uses permitted in the various zoning districts shall be considered with many factors in determining the zoning district or districts within which such new or unlisted use shall be permitted.

C. If the zoning administrator determines that the new or unlisted use is not similar to any use allowed within the Table of Permissible Uses, or the requestor does not agree with the determination of the zoning administrator, then the initial request and the zoning administrator's determination shall be forwarded to the city plan commission requesting an interpretation as to the zoning classification into which such use should be placed.

D. The city plan commission shall consider the nature and described performance of the proposed use and compatibility with the uses permitted in the various districts and after public hearing determine the zoning district or districts within which such use should be permitted.

E.

The city plan commission shall transmit its findings and recommendations to the city council as to the classification proposed for any new or unlisted

use. The city council may approve the recommendation of the city plan commission or make such determination concerning the classification of such use as is determined appropriate after giving consideration to the facts and recommendations; and shall direct that an ordinance be drafted to amend the zoning code in order to allow such use.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.08.050 - Change in use.

A change in use occurs whenever the essential character or nature of the activity conducted on a property, or portion thereof, substantially changes from one principal use category to another, requiring that new permits be obtained pursuant to Chapter 20.04 (Administrative Provision) of this title. For purposes of this section, substantial change occurs when the relative proportion of space devoted to the principal use changes to such an extent that the parking requirement for the use is altered or when the type of individual principal use or combination of uses changes. A change in the status of the property from unoccupied to occupied or vice versa, or a change in ownership or business name, shall not be regarded as a change in use.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.08.060 - Combination uses.

When a property comprises two or more principal uses that require different types of permits, then the permit authorizing the combination use shall be:

A. A special permit if any of the principal uses combined is permitted only as a special permit use;

B. A detailed site development plan approval if any of the principal uses combined is permitted only following a detailed site development plan approval;

or

C. A building permit in all other cases.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. No. 19244, § 12, 10-12-2021)

Chapter 20.10 - SUPPLEMENTAL USE REGULATIONS

20.10.010 - General restrictions.

A. Conformance with Regulations. Any use hereafter placed on land and any building or part thereof hereafter erected, altered, expanded, placed, converted, or otherwise located in the city shall comply with the requirements set forth in this title and otherwise as required by this City Code.

B. Lot Required. Every building hereafter erected, altered, expanded, placed, converted, or otherwise located shall be on a lot or lots, and in no case shall there be more than one main building on one lot unless otherwise provided in this title. Where more than one building is allowed for a principal use within a zoning district, all buildings shall be subject to the provisions of this title. All buildings shall be so located on a lot or lots as to provide for safe and convenient vehicular access.

C. Legal Access Required. No lot or portion thereof shall be used or occupied unless such lot has frontage upon an accessway, except for agricultural uses associated with the conduct of a farm or ranch.

D. Reference to Other Legislation.

1. Any condominium project and any declaration or restriction to be filed in connection therewith shall comply in all respects with the provisions of the Texas Condominium Act and with the requirements of the ordinance codified herein to the extent not in direct conflict.

2.

No building or land shall hereafter be used and no building or part thereof shall be erected, altered, expanded, placed, converted, or otherwise located on a lot or lots unless in conformity with the regulations of this Code and any applicable state or federal regulations.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. 16653 8 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.020 - General performance standards.

20.10.020 - General performance standards.

The general performance standards set forth below are intended to reduce the impacts that development may have on adjacent properties. Satisfactory compliance with the performance standards shall be required to be demonstrated for a particular use at the time of issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy, and continued compliance with the performance standards shall be enforced by the city against any use if there are reasonable grounds to believe that the performance standards are being violated by such use. The determination of the existence of any dangerous and objectionable elements shall be made at the location of the use creating the same and at any point where the existence of such elements may be more apparent.

A. Noise. No use permissible in any zoning district may generate noise that tends to have an annoying or disruptive effect upon uses located outside the immediate space occupied by the use if that use is one of several located on a lot, or uses located on adjacent lots. The maximum permissible noise levels are set forth in Chapter 9.40 (Noise) of this Code. Maximum permissible noise levels shall vary according to the use and zoning of the lot(s). Decibel level measurements shall be taken at the boundary line of the lot where the use is located.

B. Vibration. No use permissible in any zoning district may generate any ground-transmitted vibration that is perceptible to the human sense of touch measured at the outside boundary of the immediate space occupied by the use generating the vibration if the use is one of several located on a lot, or the lot line if the use generating the vibration is the only use located on a lot. Ground-transmitted vibration shall not be permitted in excess of the maximum limits set forth in Chapter 9.16 (Nuisances) of this Code. Vibration shall be measured at any adjacent lot line with suitable instrumentation or computed on the basis of displacement and frequency.

C. Odors. No use permissible in any zoning district may generate any odor that reaches the odor threshold measured at the outside boundary of the immediate space occupied by the use generating the odor, or the lot line if the use generating the odor is the only use located on a lot. For purposes of this section, the odor threshold shall be defined as the minimum concentration in air of a gas, vapor, or particulate matter that can be detected by the olfactory system as set forth in Chapter 9.16 (Nuisances) of this Code.

D. Air Pollution. Any use permissible in any zoning district that emits any air contaminant shall comply with applicable standards of Chapter 9.36 (Air Pollution) of this Code, 30 TAC (Texas Administrative Code), and any state or federal standards concerning air pollution. No permit may be issued for a use emitting an "air contaminant" until the state or federal agency with jurisdiction has certified to the city that the appropriate permits have been received or that the development is otherwise in compliance with applicable laws.

E. Disposal of Liquid Wastes. No use permissible in any zoning district may:

1. Discharge any waste contrary to the provisions of Title 19 (Subdivisions) of this Code, and any state or federal law governing discharges of radiological, chemical, or biological wastes into surface or subsurface waters; or

2. Discharge into the city sewage treatment facilities any waste that cannot be adequately treated by biological means, or without the permission of the El Paso Water Utility.

F.

Electrical Disturbance or Interference. No use permissible in any zoning district may:

1. Create any electrical disturbance that adversely affects any operations or equipment other than those of the creator of such disturbance; or

2. Otherwise cause, create, or contribute to the interference with electronic signals (including, but not limited to, television, telephone and radio broadcasting transmissions) to the extent that the operation of any equipment not owned by the creator of such disturbance is adversely affected.

G.

Fire and Explosion Hazards. All activities involving and all storage of flammable and explosive materials shall ensure there are adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion, and adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment and devices standard in the industry pursuant to applicable sections of Chapter 9.52 (Fire Prevention Code) of this Code, and any relevant state or federal standards.

H. Glare. No direct or sky-reflected glare from high-temperature processes, such as but not limited to combustion, welding or otherwise, so as to be visible at the property line shall be permitted.

I. Lighting. All entrances, exits, parking lots, and other common areas and facilities within a lot shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of property and the safety of persons using such areas and facilities, provided, however, that lighting within a lot shall be adequately shielded or directed so that illumination is provided in a manner that would not substantially interfere with the use or enjoyment of neighboring properties, and is in compliance with Title 18.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.030 - Accessory buildings and structures.

A. Residential.

1. Residential accessory buildings shall not exceed one story or fifteen feet in height and must be located in a rear yard, or in a side yard if minimum required side setbacks are maintained, except as permitted in Section 20.10.035 (Accessory Dwelling Units). Condensing units for central air conditioning systems shall be no closer than five feet to a lot line.

2. Any residential accessory building closer than five feet to a main building shall be considered as part of the main building, shall be located within the buildable area required for a main building, and shall be subject to all applicable restrictions for the main building.

3.

Detached residential accessory buildings shall be located not less than sixty feet from the front lot line, a minimum of five feet from the main building, and shall comply with the side and side street yard requirements. No rear yard setback shall be required, except for accessory dwelling units as permitted in Section

20.10.035.

4. The gross floor area of all combined detached residential accessory buildings on a lot shall not exceed the more restrictive of the following, except that one building with up to four hundred square feet shall be permitted:

a. Fifty percent of the gross floor area of the main building; or

b. Forty percent of the area of the rear yard.

5. A residential private garage or other accessory building may be connected to the main building by a breezeway or connected by a fence or wall up to six feet in height, provided that the breezeway shall not exceed an overall width of five feet and shall be a minimum of seventy-five percent open to the outside on both sides.

6. Residential accessory buildings shall be built concurrently with or after the construction of the main building and shall be used only as permitted by this Code.

7. Where a residential garage entrance is from an alley, the structure must be located at least five feet from the property line.

8. In residential, apartment and special districts where community refuse containers are provided, these shall be completely screened from view by fences or walls and have a gate which can be latched open.

B. Ranch and Farm District.

1. A maximum of two single-family dwelling units shall be permitted for farm and ranch properties of not less than six acres nor more than twenty-five acres, without regard to street frontage, provided both dwelling units shall be for year-round farm and ranch operators, or farm and ranch workers and their families.

2. One additional dwelling unit for additional farm and ranch workers and their families shall be permitted for each additional twenty-five acres.

C. Placement of Portable Storage Containers.

1. On any lot located in zoning district C2, C3, C4, M1, M2, M3, PI, GMU or IMU one or more portable storage containers may be permitted as accessory storage to the principal use(s) provided the following conditions are met:

2. The floor area contained in the portable storage container shall be limited to no more than ten percent of the floor area of the principal use except that for principal buildings less than one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet in size, the container may be up to one hundred sixty square feet in size. In buildings with multiple tenants, no single user shall be permitted more than ten percent of the floor area of its use.

3.

Portable storage containers shall be located at least five feet behind the front wall line of the principal building.

4. Portable storage containers shall be required to meet side and rear setback requirements for buildings and shall be located at least twenty feet from any abutting apartment or residential zoning district.

5.

Signage on portable storage containers shall be limited to one sign per container, not exceeding two square feet. The signage shall not be visible from

any abutting street or any adjacent property in an apartment or residential zoning district.

6.

Vertical stacking of portable storage container and stacking of any other materials or merchandise on top of any portable storage container shall be prohibited. No running gear shall be left underneath any portable storage container.

7. No portable storage container shall be placed or located on a required parking space, circulation aisle/lane, fire access lane, required landscape area, required open space, retention or detention basins, loading zone, or any other location that may cause hazardous conditions or constitute a threat to public safety.

8.

A building permit shall be required for the installation of portable storage containers and the design and installation of any such portable storage containers shall comply with Title 18.

9. Exceptions:

a. Portable storage containers temporarily placed on lots during a period of ongoing permitted construction on the same lots are exempt from the above requirements.

b. The temporary placement of a portable storage container on a lot for the purpose of loading and unloading household contents shall be permitted for a period of time not exceeding seven days in a calendar year.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17532, §§ 2—4, 4-19-2011)

20.10.035 - Accessory dwelling unit (ADU).

A.

In addition to the regulations in Section 20.10.030, detached accessory dwelling units in residential zoning districts shall comply with the following:

1. The property owner must occupy either the principal unit or the accessory dwelling unit as their permanent residence. An owner of a property containing an accessory dwelling unit who is absent for a period of one year or less may rent the owner's unit as well as the second unit during the temporary absence.

2.

Only one ADU is permitted on a lot with a detached single-family dwelling. ADUs are not permitted on lots with a duplex or multi-family units.

3. The minimum lot area is five thousand five hundred square feet.

4. If the lot is designated for on-site ponding, the maximum lot coverage, including all buildings and impervious surfaces, is fifty percent.

5. The ADU shall not exceed eight hundred square feet of gross floor area, except that for lots containing eight thousand square feet or more, the ADU shall not exceed one thousand two hundred square feet gfa.

6. The ADU shall not contain more than one bedroom.

7. The ADU shall comply with all building code requirements for a dwelling unit, including but not limited to, heating and cooling, cooking and bathroom facilities.

8. The ADU shall be located a minimum of ten feet from any property line, except that when the rear property line abuts an alley with a minimum ROW of twenty feet, the rear setback for an ADU may be reduced to zero feet; and when the rear property line abuts an alley with ROW less than twenty feet, the rear setback for an ADU may be reduced to five feet, or less if approved by the traffic engineer.

9. Vehicular access to the ADU is permitted from an abutting alley if on-site parking is provided for the ADU.

10. The height of the ADU shall not exceed the height of the principal unit.

11.

Windows shall not be permitted on the wall of an ADU that is within ten feet of the property line abutting a residential use, if the ADU is taller than one story or fifteen feet, unless a minimum fifteen feet buffer of privacy trees (see approved tree list) are planted at fifteen feet on center along the side and/or rear property lines adjacent to the ADU.

12. ADUs shall resemble the principal unit in scale and character.

13. Windows shall be similar to the principal unit in the following ways: Type of window, trim style, proportions.

B.

Attached accessory dwelling units are permitted when they comply with the following:

1. Only one ADU is permitted on a lot with a single-family dwelling. ADUs are not permitted on lots with a duplex or multi-family units.

2. The minimum lot area is five thousand five hundred square feet.

3. The ADU shall not exceed eight hundred square feet of gross floor area except that for lots containing eight thousand square feet or more, the ADU shall not exceed one thousand two hundred square feet gfa.

4. The ADU shall not contain more than one bedroom.

5. The ADU shall comply with all building code requirements for a dwelling unit, including but not limited to, heating and cooling, cooking and bathroom facilities.

6. The ADU shall comply with all yard standards of the zoning district.

7. A separate entrance shall be provided for the ADU.

8. Vehicular access to the ADU is permitted from an abutting alley if on-site parking is provided for the ADU.

9. The height of the ADU shall not exceed the height of the principal unit.

10.

ADUs shall resemble the principal unit in scale, material and color. Roof pitch, siding material and color shall match the principal unit.

11. Windows shall be similar to the principal unit in the following ways: type of window, trim style, proportions.

(Ord. No. 17532, § 5, 4-19-2011; Ord. No. 18973, § 1, 9-3-2019)

20.10.040 - Accessory uses, medical.

Permitted accessory uses for hospitals, medical and dental offices may include florist shops, gift shops and pharmacies, with the following restrictions:

A. No display of goods or merchandise shall be visible from any public street;

B. No sign advertising the accessory use or service shall be visible from any public street; and

C. All access to the accessory use or service shall be from within a completely enclosed building and no outside entrance shall be visible from any public street.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.050 - Accessory uses, residential development.

The following are permitted accessory uses in attached single-family developments or multifamily developments:

A. An office located in a main building for administration of a development containing ten or more dwelling units;

B. A laundry room for use of occupants of a development;

C. A sauna, exercise room, clubhouse or similar facility for use of occupants of a development;

D. Vending machines for candy, ice, soft drinks and sundries, located inside a building.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.055 - Adaptive reuse overlay.

A. Purpose. The purpose of an adaptive reuse overlay (ARO) is to revitalize neighborhoods and increase new housing opportunities within the El Paso Downtown 2015 Plan area by allowing more flexible development standards for certain residential and/or mixed uses within the area.

B. Applicability. An adaptive reuse overlay (ARO) may be placed on property located in El Paso Downtown 2015 Plan area and can only be used for the conversion of all or any portion of an existing building to any of the following new residential and/or mixed uses:

1. Dwelling units (single family, duplex, triplex, quadraplex, townhomes, apartments, condominiums).

2. Single room occupancy (SRO).

3. Live-work units.

4. Mixed-use buildings.

5. Other uses permitted in the underlying zoning district.

C.

Designation. An application for an ARO designation may be initiated either by city council, a property owner or group of property owners.

D.

Application. An application for an ARO designation shall be subject to the notice and public hearing requirements and procedures of Chapter 20.04, and shall also be accompanied with all of the following:

1. A list of all the properties and property owners in the area described in the application; and

2. A map of the area.

E. Development standards.

1. The ARO standards are optional and provide for greater density and flexible standards. A property owner within the ARO may use the standards identified in this section or may use the underlying zoning district standards for their property. All of the permitted uses in the underlying zoning district are permitted in the ARO. Additionally, within the ARO, a property owner may convert all or any portion of an existing building to any of the uses in Section 20.10.455 B.

2.

The following modified development standards apply for adaptive reuse projects in the El Paso Downtown 2015 Plan area for properties zoned UP, C- 5, C-4, C-1, S-D, SRR, and M-1:

a. Minimum front, rear and side setbacks: Zero feet.

b. Maximum height: Five stories or as permitted in the underlying zoning district.

c. Minimum lot area, width, and depth: None.

d. Minimum square footage for multi-family dwelling units: Four hundred fifty; except that the total units within a development shall have a minimum average square footage of six hundred fifty.

e. Adaptive reuse projects are exempt from detailed site development plan requirements in Title 20.

f. Adaptive reuse projects are exempt from landscape requirements in Title 18, except that where there is minimum of ten feet of existing parkway (including sidewalk), street trees shall be provided in accordance with Article IV — Street Trees, of Section 18.46.

g. Unless specifically modified in Subsection E. above, all other dimensional and density standards and parking standards of the underlying zoning district standards in Title 20 shall apply to any property with an ARO overlay.

h. All properties within an ARO will carry the suffix "ARO," indicating that such property may be developed under the land use and design standards of the ARO.

(Ord. No. 17754, § 2, 3-20-2012)

20.10.060 - Alcoholic beverages.

A.

Requirements. The sale, storage, or handling of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of sale is permitted only where the use is authorized by and complies with all applicable provisions of this title and the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.

1.

The sale, storage or handling of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of sale is permitted only where licensed in accordance with Chapter 5.08 of the city code and the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Code.

2. The sale, storage or handling of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of sale is permitted only in approved locations within the interior of buildings or structures that have a valid certificate of occupancy allowing such use.

3. The sale, storage or handling of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of sale is permitted in specific uses in the following zoning districts, subject to the requirements of this chapter:

a. C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, and C-5 commercial districts;

b. P-C planned commercial district;

c. GMU general mixed use district;

d.

S-D special development district;

e. U-P union plaza district;

f. M-1, M-2 and M-3 manufacturing districts;

g. IMU industrial mixed use district.

4.

The sale, storage or handling of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of sale is permitted as an accessory use to specific permitted uses in the following

zoning districts, subject to the requirements of this chapter:

a. R-F ranch and farm district;

b. R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4 and R-5 residential districts;

c. PMD planned mountain development district;

d. A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4 apartment districts;

e.

A-O and A-3/O apartment/office districts;

f. COP commercial office park district;

g. A-M apartment and manufactured home park district;

h. RMU residential mixed use district;

i. PR-1 and PR-II planned residential districts.

j. NOS natural open space district.

5. The sale, storage or handling of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of sale is permitted as an accessory use to specific uses allowed by special permit in the following zoning districts, subject to the requirements of this chapter:

a. PMD planned mountain development district;

b. A-1, A-2, A-3 and A-4 apartment districts;

c. A-O and A-3/O apartment/office districts;

d. A-M apartment and manufactured home park district.

B. Restrictions.

1.

The sale, storage or handling of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of sale is not permitted in any zoning district where the place of business is located within three hundred feet of a church, public or private school, or public hospital; however, this section shall not apply where the applicant has approval from the affected church, public or private school, or public hospital in writing.

2. The sale, storage or handling of alcoholic beverages for the purpose of sale is not permitted in any zoning district where the place of business is located within three hundred feet of a day-care center or a child-care facility as defined in the Texas Human Resources Code § 42.002 and the permit or license holder does not hold a food and beverage certificate issued by the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Commission, unless expressly varied pursuant to the requirements of this section, except that this provision shall not apply:

a. If the permit or license holder and the day-care center or child-care facility are located on different stories of a multistory building; or

b. If the permit or license holder and the day-care center or child-care facility are located in separate buildings and either the permit or license holder or the day-care center or child-care facility is located on the second story or higher of a multistory building; or

c. Neither section a. or b. within this subsection, is applicable if the applicant has approval from the affected day-care center or child-care facility in writing.

3.

The distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a church or public hospital shall be measured along the property lines of the street fronts and from front door to front door, and in direct line across intersections.

4. The distance between the place of business where alcoholic beverages are sold and a school, day-care center or child-care facility shall be measured in direct line from the property line of the school, day-care center or child-care facility to the property line of the place of business, and in a direct line across intersections.

5.

The prohibition of the sale of alcoholic beverages within three hundred feet of a church, school or public hospital shall not apply to the sale of alcoholic beverages by any business that held a valid license on August 31, 1983, and has remained established and engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages within three hundred feet of any church, school or public hospital; nor shall the provisions of this section prevent any business legally engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages on August 31, 1983, and continuing to be so engaged within three hundred feet of any church, school or public hospital from securing a renewal of their license, nor from a new license being issued for such location to any other applicant.

6.

The prohibition of the sale of alcoholic beverages within three hundred feet of a commercial day care shall not apply to the sale of alcoholic beverages by any business that held a valid license on June 5, 2007, and has remained established and engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages within three hundred feet of any commercial day care; nor shall the provisions of this section prevent any business legally engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages on June 5, 2007, and continuing to be so engaged within three hundred feet of any commercial day care from securing a renewal of their license, nor from a new license being issued for such location to any other applicant.

7.

The city council may grant an exception from prohibition of the sale of alcoholic beverages within three hundred feet of a church, school, commercial day care or public hospital after notice and public hearing if the council determines that the enforcement of the prohibition in a particular instance:

a. Is not in the best interest of the public;

b. Constitutes waste or the inefficient use of land or other resources;

c. Creates an undue hardship on an applicant;

d. Does not serve its intended purpose;

e. Is not effective or necessary; or

f. For any other reason the city council, after consideration of the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation,

determines is in the best interest of the community.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17306, § 4, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 18458, §§ 1, 2, 1-12-2016)

20.10.070 - Amateur and CB radios.

Federally licensed amateur and CB radio stations must comply with FCC regulations. Installation of radio towers and masts shall comply with the building code requirements of the city.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.080 - Animal facilities (animal kennel, animal training facility, veterinary treatment center, clinic or hospital).

A.

Kennels and animal training establishments are permitted when in compliance with Title 7 of this Code and the following conditions:

1. In the Ranch-Farm zoning district, provided,

a.

The site has a minimum of six acres, and

b. Any building relating to this use is not closer than three hundred feet from the nearest residential or apartment district or use;

2.

In C-2, C-3, C-4 and M-1 zoning districts:

a. All animals are housed inside a permitted structure,

b. No open pens are provided or used,

c. No building, structure or open area (except space for parking of employee and customer automobiles) shall be used for this use unless it is at least three hundred feet from the nearest residential or apartment district or use,

d. A means of mechanical air exchange is provided for all permitted structures, and

e. No outside runs are permitted.

B.

Small animal veterinary hospitals or clinics are permitted when in compliance with Title 7 of this Code and the following conditions:

1. In the R-1 and C-1 zoning districts (with a special permit approved by city council):

a. All animals are housed inside a permitted structure that is completely enclosed and soundproof,

b. No open pens are provided or used,

c. The distance between a building, structure or open area (except for parking of employee and customer automobiles) used for any hospital or clinic purpose to the property line of any residential or apartment use existing at the time the hospital or clinic is established shall not be less than one hundred fifty feet. This restriction does not apply to a residential structure located on the same site and used as a part of the hospital or clinic operation,

d. A means of mechanical air exchange is provided for all permitted structures, and

e. No outside runs are permitted;

2. In C-2, C-3, C-4 and M-1 zoning districts:

a. All animals are housed inside a permitted structure,

b. No open pens are provided or used,

c. No building, structure or open area (except space for parking of employee and customer automobiles) shall be used for any hospital or clinic purpose unless it is at least one hundred fifty feet from the property line of any residential or apartment use at the time the hospital or clinic use is established,

d. A means of mechanical air exchange is provided for all permitted hospital or clinic structures, and

e. No outside runs are permitted.

C. Small or large animal veterinary hospitals or clinics in the R-F zoning district, and large animal hospitals or clinics in the C-4 and M-1 zoning districts with a special permit approved by city council, must comply with Title 7 of this Code, and the following conditions:

1. Lot area shall be a minimum of one acre with a minimum average lot width of two hundred feet,

2. No building, structure, open pen or corral (except open space for parking of employee and customer automobiles) shall be used for any hospital or clinic purpose unless it is at least one hundred fifty feet from the nearest residential or apartment district or use at the time the hospital or clinic use is established, and

3. A means of mechanical air exchange is provided for all hospital or clinic structures.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17325, §§ 1, 2, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 17792, § 1, 5-29-2012)

(Ord. No. 17325, 88 1, 2, 5-25-2010; Ord. No. 17792, 8 1, 5-29-2012)

20.10.090 - Automotive uses.

A.

Motor Vehicle Repair, Minor. When located in S-D, C-1, C-2 and P-C zoning districts, facilities are subject to the following standards:

1. The property has frontage on a collector arterial or larger street;

2. A maximum building square footage of four thousand square feet is permitted;

3. A minimum twenty-five foot setback is required from any abutting residential or apartment use or district;

4. All services must be performed within an enclosed building;

5. No service bay doors may open facing a residential use or district;

6. No overnight outside storage of inoperative vehicles is allowed; and

7. No outside display of stock or inventory sold at retail shall be permitted.

B.

Motor Vehicle Repair, Major. Facilities shall comply with the following standards:

1. The property has frontage on a collector arterial or larger street;

2. A minimum twenty-five foot setback is required from any abutting residential or apartment use or district;

3. No service bay doors may open facing a residential use or district; and

4. No outside display of stock or inventory sold at retail shall be permitted.

C.

Motor Vehicle Storage Yard (accessory use to motor vehicle repair). Facilities shall comply with the following standards:

1. These yards shall be paved and enclosed by a six-foot screening wall except for necessary ingress and egress or where prohibited by this Code, to prevent visibility from adjacent properties or rights-of-way;

2. For the purposes of this use, temporary storage of a vehicle means for a maximum of ten consecutive calendar days;

3.

The maximum number of vehicles authorized in temporary storage at any one time shall be the greater of three vehicles per bay or ten vehicles; and

4. A vehicle must be inoperative and waiting for parts, or unsafe to operate, to be temporarily stored in this manner.

D. Rental Satellite Location. In the S-D, C-1, C-2 and P-C zoning districts, a maximum of ten vehicles are permitted.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.100. - Reserved.

Editor's note— Ord. No. 019734, § 3, 5-28-2025, repealed § 20.10.100, which pertained to bakeries and tortilla factories and derived from Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), adopted 2007.

20.10.110 - Banks and financial institutions.

Drive in facilities must have a stacking lane or deceleration lane as approved by the traffic engineer.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.115 - Boarding home facilities.

All boarding home facilities must be licensed in accordance with the provisions of Title 5 of this Code.

(Ord. No. 17577, § 4, 7-7-2011; Ord. No. 18241, § 3, 9-9-2014)

20.10.120 - Carwash facilities.

A forty-foot minimum front yard setback and thirty-foot minimum rear yard setback shall be required, except that the main building shall be a minimum of one hundred feet from any residential or apartment use or district.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.140 - Child care facilities.

A. Home occupation - child care facilities shall comply with the following:

1. A license shall be maintained at all times as required by law or ordinance;

2. The home child care facility shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the principal use of the property;

3. A caregiver shall be required;

4. The front, side and side street yards shall be maintained as open space and all play activity shall be confined to the rear yard;

5.

An indoor area of thirty square feet, excluding single purpose areas as defined in the Texas Human Resources Code, and a rear yard area of eighty square feet shall

be provided per child;

6. Permitted signs shall be limited to a one square foot nameplate attached to and not projecting more than one inch beyond the face of the building;

7. The exterior of the building or grounds shall not be altered, decorated or painted in any way to distract from the residential character of the neighborhood;

8. Annual certification shall be required from the fire chief, building official, director of the department of environmental services, and licensing supervisor for the Texas Department of Family and Protective Services that the use and structure comply with the requirements of their respective codes. Provisions of Section 20.10.270 shall also apply to home child care facilities;

9. The play area shall be separated from adjacent properties by a solid masonry wall, not less than four feet high. The solid masonry wall may be along any or all rear lot lines or surrounding the play area, so long as a solid masonry wall exists between the play area and all adjacent property;

10. A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided plus one additional off-street parking space for every six children. For this use, the off- street parking requirement shall include garage or carport spaces, and paved driveways which may or may not afford ingress and egress for an automobile. Any passenger loading or unloading at curbside shall be subject to approval by the traffic engineer.

B. Commercial day care centers shall comply with the following:

1. License or registration is maintained at all times when required by law or ordinance;

2. A solid wall, not less than four feet high, is maintained along all interior lot lines with separate play areas for adjacent properties. If the play area abuts open, undeveloped land, a four-foot fence may be substituted, provided that a solid wall is built when the abutting land is developed;

3. The required front yard, and side street yard if one exists, shall be maintained as open space and shall not be used for child care;

4. There shall be at least thirty square feet of indoor activity space for each child in the day care center, measured wall-to-wall on the inside, not including single-use areas;

5. The day care center shall have at least eighty square feet of outdoor play area for each child using the area at one time. All outdoor play areas used by the children shall be accessible by a safe route and enclosed by a building or fence at least four feet high with at least two exits.

(Ord. 16817 § 3, 2008; Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.145 - Civic buildings, public spaces, and educational facilities.

Any civic building, public space, and/or educational facilities as defined in this title shall conform to, in addition to all other applicable code provisions, the development standards set forth herein.

A. For purposes of this ordinance, a civic building and/or public space shall be categorized and defined as one of the following, which shall be declared by the applicant on the application form for the detailed site development plan:

Neighborhood Facility. A civic building and/or public space designed for and which serves the residents of a neighborhood, which is defined for purposes of this section as an area of one-half square mile. Minimum standards for a neighborhood facility shall include:

Maximum Lot Area: Fifteen contiguous acres Location: Allowed on collectors and residential streets Front yard setback: Fifty feet maximum Frontage Build-out: Sixty percent of the building façade (including the main entrance) must remain unobstructed.

Community Facility. A civic building and/or public space designed for and which serves the residents of several neighborhood areas, but within the same approximate geographic area, defined for purposes of this section as an area of one square mile.

Maximum Lot Area: Twenty-five contiguous acres Location: Allowed on minor arterials, collectors, and residential streets Front yard setback: Eighty feet maximum

Frontage Build-out:

Sixty percent of the building façade (including the main entrance) must remain

unobstructed

Regional Facility. A civic building and/or public space designed for and which serves the residents of the entire city, nearby communities, and unincorporated areas.

areas.

Maximum Lot Area: Forty contiguous acres Location: Allowed in major and minor arterials Front setback: One hundred feet maximum Frontage Build-out: Sixty percent the building façade (including the main entrance) must remain unobstructed

B. Minimum Standards for Educational Facilities. For the purpose of this ordinance, an educational facility is defined as a school serving pre-kindergarten through sixth grade (PK-6 th ).

Twenty-five acres One hundred feet maximum Sixty percent of unobstructed building façade to include the main entrance

Maximum Developed

Lot Area:

Front yard setback:

Frontage Build-Out:

C. Additional Requirements. The application process for a civic building and/or public space will require a detailed site development plan illustrating integration of the facility within the neighborhood through building design, placement of buildings, pedestrian walkways within the site, landscaping, and parking areas. Administrative review and approval of the detailed site development plan must be completed no more than thirty days after submission of a completed application. An application for a detailed site development plan under this subsection is exempt from Sections 20.04.150 C.1. and 2. Administrative approval and 20.04.150 D. City plan commission approval. If no comments are provided by the city on the detailed site development plan within thirty days of submission, the detailed site development plan, listed in subsection 2(a) through (j) below, may be granted by the city manager or designee. In the event that the city and the applicant cannot agree on the contents of a proposed detailed site development plan, the applicant can appeal to the city plan commission within fifteen business days from the denial of the application. An application for a detailed site development plan must include the following:

1. Proof of outreach and consultation with stakeholders such as residents, parents, facility-end users, elected officials, and neighborhood associations in planning the development of the civic building and/or public space. Examples of outreach and consultation include but are not limited to notice of meetings, flyers of the event, sign-in sheets, and/or newspaper clippings.

2. A detailed site plan must depict the following:

a. Designation of a system of A and B streets serving the facility. An A street is defined as a street that includes a main principle entrance and the architectural and design focal points of the building and/or buildings. Parking is restricted along the A street as outlined in Section 20.10.145 A. Frontage build-out. A B street is defined as a secondary street where the emphasis should be on driveways, drop-off zones, parking lots, and auxiliary entrances.

b. Minimum five-foot sidewalks with minimum five-foot parkway along all street frontages shall be required.

c. In no instance shall parking be placed between the principal entrance and the street. Parking may be placed beyond the sixty percent unobstructed frontage build-out.

d. The number of access points shall not exceed three along any B street and two along any A street.

e. The width of driveway apron shall not exceed twenty-eight feet.

f.

The building design may strive to serve as a community landmark. Factors to be considered may include: the principal entrance of the building should serve as a

terminating vista and other architectural design elements should be compatible with the surrounding area and/or districts.

g. Plazas, courtyards, and/or other passive open space components may be incorporated within the site.

h. Landscaping shall conform to current city regulations.

i. Civic buildings may be located adjacent to a public park.

j. Principle frontage screening may be constructed and be limited to a four-foot maximum combination masonry material and decorative wrought iron screening fence beyond the unobstructed sixty percent frontage build-out as outlined in Section 20.10.140 C.2.c.

k.

Illustrate the quarter-mile pedestrian shed in which at a maximum, the following may be illustrated:

i. For neighborhood facility: Seventy-five percent of surrounding residential land uses should be included within this shed.

ii. For community facility: Fifty percent of surrounding residential land uses should be included within this shed.

iii. For regional facility: Twenty-five percent of surrounding residential land uses should be included within this shed.

3. An intergovernmental agreement for the shared use of facilities is encouraged.

D.

Educational Facilities. The application process for an educational facility will require a detailed site development plan illustrating the integration of the facility within the neighborhood through building design, placement of buildings, pedestrian walkways within the site, landscaping, and parking areas. Administrative review and approval of the detailed site development plan must be completed no more than thirty days after submission of a completed application. An application for a detailed site development plan under this subsection is exempt from Sections 20.04.150 C.1. and 2. Administrative approval and 20.04.150 D. City plan commission approval. If no comments are provided by the city on the detailed site development plan within thirty days of submission, the detailed site development plan is deemed approved. Exceptions to the requirements of a detailed site development plan, listed in subsection 2.(a) through (j) below, may be granted by the city manager. In the event that the city and the applicant cannot agree on the contents of a proposed detailed site development plan, the applicant can appeal to the city plan commission within fifteen business days from the denial of the application. An application for a detailed site development plan must include the following:

1. Proof of outreach and consultation with stakeholders such as residents, parents, facility-end users, elected officials, and neighborhood associations in planning the development of the civic building and/or public space. Examples of outreach and consultation include but are not limited to notice of meetings, flyers of the event, sign-in sheets, and/or newspaper clippings.

2. A detailed site development plan must depict the following:

a. Designation of a system of A and B streets serving the facility. An A street is defined as a street that includes a main principle entrance and the architectural and design focal points of the building and/or buildings. Parking is restricted along the A street as outlined in Section 20.10.145 A. Frontage build-out. A B street is defined as a secondary street where the emphasis should be on driveways, drop-off zones, parking lots, and auxiliary entrances.

b.

Minimum five-foot sidewalks with minimum five-foot parkway along all street frontages shall be required.

c.

In no instance shall parking be placed between the principal entrance and the street. Parking may be placed beyond the sixty percent unobstructed frontage build-out.

d. The number of access points shall not exceed three along any B street and two along any A street.

e. The width of driveway apron shall not exceed twenty-eight feet.

f. The building design may strive to serve as a community landmark. Factors to be considered may include: the principal entrance of the building should serve as a terminating vista and other architectural design elements should be compatible with the surrounding area and/or districts.

g. Plazas, courtyards, and/or other passive open space components may be incorporated within the site.

h. Landscaping shall conform to current city regulations. Exceptions to reduce requirements may be granted as per Section 18.46.90 of the El Paso City Code.

i. When possible, educational facilities may be located adjacent to a public park.

j. Principle frontage screening may be constructed and be limited to a four-foot maximum combination masonry material and decorative wrought iron screening fence beyond the unobstructed sixty percent frontage build-out as outlined in Section 10.20.145 D.2.c.

3. Schools are encouraged to enter into intergovernmental agreements for the shared use of school facilities.

(Ord. No. 18104, § 4, 12-17-2013; Ord. No. 19244, § 13, 10-12-2021)

20.10.146 - Civic and cultural district.

A. Regulations should allow for a variety of sign sizes, types, and technologies associated with professional sports, cultural events, festivals, outdoor markets and other entertainment events where large numbers of people congregate, and where street closures may regularly be required. The advertising and messaging allowed within the district should be as varied as the events that take place within it.

B. District boundaries: Beginning at the intersection of the north ROW boundary of West Missouri Avenue and the east ROW boundary of North Oregon Street,

Thence southeast along the east ROW boundary of North Oregon Street to its intersection with the south ROW boundary of West Franklin Avenue,

Thence southwest along the south ROW boundary of West Franklin Avenue to its intersection with the east ROW boundary of North Santa Fe Street,

Thence in a southern direction along the east ROW boundary of North Santa Fe Street to its intersection with the south ROW boundary of West San Antonio Avenue,

Thence southwest along the south ROW boundary of West San Antonio Avenue to its intersection with the west ROW boundary of South Durango Street,

Thence in a northerly direction along the west ROW boundary of South Durango Street to its intersection with the south ROW boundary of West San Francisco Avenue,

Thence in a westerly direction along the south ROW boundary of West San Francisco Avenue to its intersection with the east ROW boundary of South Coldwell Street,

Thence in a south direction along the east ROW boundary of South Coldwell Street to its intersection with the north ROW boundary of West Paisano Drive, Thence in a northwesterly direction along the north ROW boundary of West Paisano Drive to its intersection with the south ROW boundary of the Union Pacific Railroad Company,

Thence in a southeasterly direction along the south ROW boundary of the Union Pacific Railroad Company to its intersection with the west ROW boundary of South Durango Street,

Thence in a northerly direction along the west ROW boundary of South Durango Street to its intersection with the north ROW boundary of West Missouri Avenue,

Thence northeast along the north ROW boundary of West Missouri Avenue to the point of beginning.

(Ord. No. 18135, § 1, 3-4-2014; Ord. No. 019578, § 3, 12-12-2023)

20.10.150 - Reserved.

Editor's note— Ord. No. 18241, § 3, adopted September 9, 2014, repealed § 20.10.150, which pertained to congregate home and derived from Ord. 16817 § 4, 2008; Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007.

20.10.160 - Contractor yards.

A. The contractor's business office may be an accessory use to a contractor's yard.

B. Vehicles and equipment used by that contractor may be repaired or maintained in a contractor's yard provided such work is done in an enclosed building or structure.

C. A six-foot high screening wall shall be required at the rear property line and at interior side property lines, and a forty-two inch high screening wall shall be required at the front property line and side street property lines (except where otherwise prohibited by this Code) to minimize visual impacts on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.165 - Credit access business.

The provisions of this section apply to any property with a use designation of "credit access business" as defined by this Title in Section 20.02.279.

A. No credit access businesses may be located within one thousand feet, measured from property line to property line, of any other credit access business.

B. No credit access businesses may be located within three hundred feet, measured from property line to property line, of a lot in a residential district, SmartCode zone or special control area as defined by Chapter 20.18.250.

C. No credit access business may be located within five hundred feet of an existing freeway or new freeway as defined in Section 20.02.392, measured from the property line of the credit access business to the nearest freeway or new freeway travel lane.

D. A credit access business may only operate within a freestanding building.

E. Credit access businesses are prohibited as accessory uses and may not operate in the same freestanding structure as any other use.

F. In zoning districts where credit access businesses are permitted, a special permit shall be required, subject to the requirements of Chapter 20.04 Article V., Special Permit Approval Process.

G.

All credit access businesses shall comply with the provisions set forth in Chapter 5.17 (Credit Access Businesses) of the El Paso City Code. Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or those contained within this Title shall subject the property to forfeiture of the special permit, per Chapter 20.04.310, Compliance with Special Permits.

H.

Any credit access business not in conformance with the provisions of this Chapter at the time of the effective date of this ordinance shall be deemed nonconforming and subject to the provisions of Chapter 20.22, Nonconforming Situations.

(Ord. No. 18244, § 2, 9-16-2014)

20.10.170 - Reserved.

Editor's note— Ord. No. 019734, § 3, 5-28-2025, repealed § 20.10.170, which pertained to custom shops and derived from Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), adopted 2007.

20.10.175 - Disabled group dwelling.

A.

Occupancy: Not more than six persons with disabilities and two supervisors may reside in a community home at the same time.

B. An on-site resident staff person must be present at all times, whenever any residents of the facility are present.

C. The establishment shall be operated and maintained in the character of a residential dwelling in harmony with and appropriate in appearance to the character of the general vicinity in which it is to be located.

D. Districts Permitted: when located at least 1,000 feet from all other licensed disabled group dwellings and licensed group residential facilities, by right in the following districts: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5, RMH, A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-0 A-3/0, A-M; C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5; and in special purpose districts R-F; by Detailed Site Plan in the following special purpose districts PMD, S-D, P-R I, P-R II, and SRR; by Master Zoning Plan in special purpose district R-MU. The spacing component of these use regulations is based, not on the disabled status of the residents, but on the non-family status of the groups.

E. Exception to the Distance Requirements: The owner and applicant may request an exception to the distance requirement from City Council. Chapter 20.04 Administrative Provisions, Article VI Changes and Amendments shall be followed to request this exception. The application fee for the public hearing shall be waived. A determination must be made by city council that the enforcement of the distance prohibition in the particular instance:

1. Is not in the best interest of the public;

2. Constitutes waste or the inefficient use of land or other resources;

WON

3.

Creates an undue hardship on an applicant;

4.

Does not serve its intended purpose;

5. Is not effective or necessary; or

6. After consideration of the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, determines is in the best interest of the community.

F.

In accordance with the Federal Fair Housing Act, this use as defined does not extend to the following people:

1.

Persons who claim to be disabled solely on the basis of having been adjudicated a juvenile delinquent;

2. Persons who claim to be disabled solely on the basis of having a criminal record;

3.

Persons who claim to be disabled solely on the basis of being registered as a sex offender;

4.

Persons who currently use illegal drugs;

5. Persons who have been convicted of the manufacture or sale of illegal drugs; or

6. Persons with or without disabilities who present a direct threat to the persons or property of others.

G.

Measurements of distance in this section are taken from property line to property line.

H.

In the event a conflict arises regarding the distance requirement, the owner or operator of a disabled group dwelling will have the burden of establishing "first in time" rights for purposes of complying with the distance requirement.

(Ord. No. 18241, § 3, 9-9-2014)

20.10.180 - Drilling facilities.

Drilling of oil or gas wells or other similar types of shaft mining shall meet the following minimum requirements:

A. Minimum site of five acres, with minimum lot width of two hundred feet, minimum lot depth of two hundred feet and minimum front, side, side street and rear yard of fifty feet;

B.

Any structure exceeding fifty feet in height shall maintain setbacks from all property boundaries on streets equal to the height of the structure;

C.

A plan is submitted and approved by city council as part of the special permit application, showing the reclamation of the site and its future use after the extraction has been completed. Approval of the fire chief, building official and the director of the department of environmental services or his designee shall be required and the use shall comply with all appropriate regulations. A bond or other guarantee satisfactory to the city attorney and in an amount approved by the building official may be required by city council as a guarantee that the reclamation plan will be carried out.

(Ord. 16817 § 5, 2008; Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.185 - Drive-thru facilities.

A principal use shall not be permitted to have a drive-thru facility under the following conditions:

A. The property is located within the C-5 (Commercial) zoning district.

(Ord. No. 019734, § 3, 5-28-2025)

20.10.190 - Dry cleaning shops.

No cleaning fluid with a base of petroleum or one of its derivatives shall be used.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 019734, § 3, 5-28-2025)

20.10.200 - Energy conversion systems.

20.10.200 - Energy conversion systems.

A. Solar energy conversion systems components, including, but not limited to, absorption cooling units, collectors, heat exchangers, photovoltaic cell arrays, solar power concentrating arrays, solar reflectors, including solar dishes and storage water tank units may be permitted as accessory uses and/or buildings in any district in accordance with building permit requirements where applicable and in compliance with the following conditions:

1. If mounted on the main building, it shall not exceed the maximum height limit as provided for such buildings by more than ten feet;

2.

If mounted on any accessory structures, it shall not exceed more than ten feet above the top of the structure;

3. No portion of the system shall project over any property line or required front, side, or side street setback.

B.

Wind-driven generators or wind-driven pumps, where permitted, are subject to the following conditions:

1. Must be located in the rear yard for all residential Zoning Districts R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-5, A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-O and residential special districts P-R I, P-R II, SRR, and P-MD;

2. Shall be in compliance with the guidelines of the Federal Aviation Administration and shall not exceed eighty feet in height in commercial C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4 and manufacturing M-1, M-2, M-3 zoning districts and not to exceed thirty five feet in height in residential R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-5, A-1, A- 2, A-3, A-4, A-O and residential special districts P-R I, P-R II, SRR, and P-MD;

3. Any propeller blades or similar devices shall come no closer than ten feet to the ground or to any structure, and shall have clearance from any overhead wires in accordance with electric utility company requirements;

4. No portion of the system shall project over any property line or required front, side, or side street setback;

5. The structural integrity of every wind-driven generator and pump, regardless of height, shall be designed and sealed by a registered professional engineer in the state of Texas;

6.

The construction of wind-driven generator and pump foundations must comply with the building code of the city;

7. Noise and vibration levels must be in compliance with Title 9 (Health and Safety) of this Code.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 18454, § 1, 1-12-2016)

20.10.210 - Explosives, storage.

Storage of explosives is permitted by special permit where the location and the safeguards imposed to regulate the possession, transportation and use are approved by the fire chief, and in compliance with all applicable state and federal regulations. City council must find that the location and safeguards are reasonable to protect the public safety. Special permits for storage of explosives shall not be granted for more than one year, but may be renewed by following the same procedure as required for original issuance.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.220 - Farming.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this title, in all zoning districts except for the PMD (Planned Mountain Development) or the NOS (Natural Open Space), a property may be used wholly or partially for farming and harvesting of field, tree and bush crops as an interim use in any zoning district until a change in use or development occurs on the property. The change in use or development of the property shall be for a use legally permissible within the base-zoning district or as permitted by special permit approved by City Council.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17306, § 4, 4-6-2010)

20.10.230 - Feed yards.

A.

A minimum site of twenty acres is required.

B. Buildings or feeder lots for five or more cattle shall not be closer than five hundred feet from the nearest property line.

C.

Written evidence of approval from the Texas Commission on Environmental Quality (TCEQ) to determine any additional environmental protection requirements must be submitted with the building permit application. A feed yard may not be located within certain sensitive systems, including, but not limited to: federally- designated wetlands, designated flood plains, and state-designated areas of "Special Sensitivity" to environmental impacts due to topography, soil type (i.e., sand, karst, etc.), water quality, natural habitat significance, or public health and welfare protection.

D.

Shall comply with Title 7 of this Code.

D. Shall comply with Title 7 of this Code.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.240 - Freight and passenger terminals.

20.10.240 - Freight and passenger terminals.

The following uses are considered freight and passenger terminals: transportation terminal type A, transportation terminal type B, passenger station, motor- carrier terminal, railyard, auxiliary rail facilities, airport, intermodal facility, heliport, airpad, helistop, interlocking tower, diesel maintenance facility, and railroad repair shop; and

The proposed development shall comply with the development standards specified below which shall be required on the building permit application:

A. Lighting shall comply with Title 18 of this Code.

B. Screening. A screening wall complying with Chapter 20.16 shall be provided along the property lines abutting an existing residential use or an existing R, A, PR, SRR, PMD or NOS zoning district, and adjacent to any right-of-way or easement which separates the property from a residential use or an R, A, PR, SRR, PMD or NOS zoning district, except for necessary ingress and egress and where otherwise prohibited by this Code

C. Perimeter Treatment. A minimum perimeter setback shall be provided along the property lines abutting an existing residential use or an existing R, A, PR, SRR, PMD or NOS zoning district, and adjacent to any right-of-way or easement which separates the property from a residential use or an R, A, PR, SRR, PMD or NOS zoning district, to minimize potential negative impacts created by any activity within the site as follows:

Use Setback (in feet) Passenger station 100 Transportation terminal type A or B 100 Railyard, auxiliary rail facilities 100 Railroad repair shop 100 Diesel maintenance facility 100 Intermodal facility 100 Airport 1500 Heliport 500 Airpad 150 Helistop 150 Motor-carrier terminal 050 Other uses 050

1. Within the minimum perimeter setback, employee and visitor off-street parking and necessary walks and drives shall be allowed. The use of the property within the designated perimeter setback for storage of containers, truck chassis, equipment, trailers or truck parking areas is expressly prohibited. This perimeter setback shall replace the required yard standard of the district where it abuts the residential use or residential zoning district.

2. Where a right-of-way or easement separates the property from a residential use or residential zoning district, the width of such right-of-way or easement shall be included in meeting the perimeter setback requirement, provided, however, that the setback from the property line shall never be less than that required in the district.

3. The minimum perimeter setback may be reduced by the zoning administrator when topographic conditions negate the buffering effect of the additional setback, provided, that the setback from the property line shall never be less than that required in the district. A fee for processing requests to reduce the minimum perimeter setback requirement shall be as provided in Chapter 20.04.

D.

Additional requirements for passenger terminals (except an airpad or helistop).

1. A lobby or waiting room with a floor area of not less than two hundred square feet must be provided.

2. Seating in the lobby or waiting room must be provided at a minimum of one seat for every twenty-five square feet of floor area in the lobby or waiting room.

3. The outdoor sale of general merchandise or food is prohibited, except for vending machines.

4. No loading or unloading of passengers is permitted on public right-of-way.

5. Analysis Required. Traffic and parking demand studies must be submitted with an application for a special use permit.

6. Outside Speaker Restrictions. Outside speakers are not permitted within fifty feet of a property line abutting a residential district or use. Outside speakers, when permitted, must face away from adjacent properties.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17306, § 4, 4-6-2010)

20.10.250 - General warehousing.

A. Screening. A screening wall complying with Chapter 20.16 (Screening and Fencing) shall be provided along the property lines abutting an existing residential use or an existing R, A, PR, SRR, PMD or NOS zoning district, and adjacent to any right-of-way or easement which separates the property from a residential use or an R, A, PR, SRR, PMD or NOS zoning district, except for necessary ingress and egress where otherwise prohibited by this Code.

B.

Perimeter Treatment. A minimum perimeter setback of fifty feet shall be provided along the property lines abutting an existing residential use or an existing R, A, PR, SRR, PMD or NOS zoning district, and adjacent to any right-of-way or easement which separates the property from a residential use or an R, A, PR, SRR, PMD or NOS zoning district, to minimize potential negative impacts created by activity within the site.

1. Within the minimum perimeter setback, employee and visitor off-street parking and loading and necessary walks and drives shall be allowed. This perimeter setback shall replace the required yard standard of the district where it abuts the residential use or residential zoning district.

2. In the case where a right-of-way or easement separates the property from a residential use or residential zoning district, the width of such right-of- way or easement shall be included in meeting the perimeter setback requirement, provided that the setback from the property line shall never be less than that required in the district.

3. The minimum perimeter setback may be reduced by the zoning administrator when topographic conditions negate the buffering effect of the additional setback, provided, that the setback from the property line shall never be less than that required in the district. A fee for processing requests to reduce the minimum perimeter setback requirement shall be as provided in Chapter 20.04.

C.

Retail sales are permitted as part of the warehouse use provided the retail sales floor area does not exceed ten percent of the total warehouse floor area.

1. Up to one hundred percent of the total warehouse floor area may be devoted to retail sales activities during an occasional warehouse sale.

2. No more than four occasional warehouse sales may be permitted in any twelve-month period and each occasional warehouse sale must be limited in duration to no more than three consecutive calendar days.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17306, § 4, 4-6-2010)

20.10.260 - Governmental uses and buildings.

Where permitted in a district, public or governmental buildings and uses, public, private or parochial schools, libraries, churches and philanthropic institutions shall be allowed to operate a collection facility subject to the standards in Section 20.10.520. When a special permit is required for heavy governmental uses in or abutting residentially zoned property, a screening wall shall be required at any lot line abutting residentially zoned property.

(Ord. 16761 § 1 (part), 2007: Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.265 - Group residential facilities.

A. Occupancy: Seven or more disabled persons.

B. An on-site resident staff person must be present at all times, whenever any residents of the facility are present.

C. The establishment shall be operated and maintained in the character of a residential dwelling in harmony with and appropriate in appearance to the character of the general vicinity in which it is to be located.

D. Districts Permitted: when located at least 1,000 feet from all other licensed disabled group dwellings and licensed group residential facilities, by special permit in the following districts: R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5, RMH, and in special purpose districts R-F; and by right in the following districts A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-0 A-3/0, A-M; C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5; by Detailed Site Plan in the following special purpose districts PMD, S-D, P-R I, P-R II, and SRR; by Master Zoning Plan

in special purpose district R-MU. The spacing component of these use regulations is based, not on the disabled status of the residents, but on the non-family status

of the groups.

E. Exception to the Distance Requirements: The owner and applicant may request an exception to the distance requirement from city council. Chapter 20.04 Administrative Provisions, Article VI Changes and Amendments shall be followed to request this exception. The application fee for the public hearing shall be waived. A determination must be made by city council that the enforcement of the distance prohibition in the particular instance:

1. Is not in the best interest of the public;

2. Constitutes waste or the inefficient use of land or other resources;

3. Creates an undue hardship on an applicant;

4. Does not serve its intended purpose;

5. Is not effective or necessary; or

6. After consideration of the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, determines is in the best interest of the community.

F.

In accordance with the Federal Fair Housing Act, this use as defined does not extend to the following people:

1.

Persons who claim to be disabled solely on the basis of having been adjudicated a juvenile delinquent;

2. Persons who claim to be disabled solely on the basis of having a criminal record;

3.

Persons who claim to be disabled solely on the basis of being registered as a sex offender;

4. Persons who currently use illegal drugs;

5. Persons who have been convicted of the manufacture or sale of illegal drugs; or

6. Persons with or without disabilities who present a direct threat to the persons or property of others.

G.

Measurements of distance in this section will be taken from property line to property line.

H. In the event a conflict arises regarding the distance requirement, the owner or operator of the group residential facility will have the burden of establishing "first in time" rights for purposes of complying with the distance requirement.

(Ord. No. 18241, § 3, 9-9-2014; Ord. No. 18589, § 2, 11-1-2016)

20.10.266 - Halfway house.

A.

A special permit for a halfway house shall be issued for a two year time period. Periodic review periods may be established as part of the special permit.

B.

The treatment of alcoholic, narcotic, or psychiatric problems is allowed under this use if expressly permitted by the special permit.

C. A halfway house may not be permitted within one thousand (1,000) feet of another halfway house or a homeless shelter.

D. Additionally, a halfway house may not be permitted within one thousand (1,000) feet of the following:

1. A church;

2. A public or private elementary or secondary school;

3. A nursery school, kindergarten, child care center, day nursery or day care center;

4. A university, college, vocational or business school;

5. A boundary of any residential district;

6. A public park; or

7. The property line of a lot devoted to any residential use.

E. A security plan must be submitted with an application for a special permit for a halfway house. The security plan must demonstrate compliance with the security requirements of state law. The director shall furnish a copy of security plans for halfway houses to appropriate city, county, state, and Federal (if applicable) agencies for their review and approval before the city plan commission and the city council consider the application. Provisions addressing security must be included in any ordinance granting a special permit for a halfway house. A compliance report must be submitted to the director every two years after the date of passage of an ordinance granting a special permit and with each application for renewal of a special permit for a halfway house.

F. Measurements of distance under this paragraph are taken radially. "Radial" measurement means a measurement taken along the shortest distance between the nearest point of the building site of the halfway house and the nearest point of the property line of another use, or of a protected zoning district boundary.

G. Within ninety (90) days of the passage of this ordinance the owner or operator of an existing halfway house must comply with the registration provisions of Section 20.22.070 and comply with the provisions of Chapter 20.22 Nonconforming Situations.

(Ord. No. 18218, § 3, 7-29-2014)

20.10.270 - Home occupation uses.

A. Where permitted as an accessory use in a district, a home occupation shall meet the following requirements:

1.

Home occupations shall be secondary and incidental to the use of the premises as a dwelling, and may only be conducted by the owner or tenant of the residence, or a family member of the owner or tenant;

2. A home occupation may not produce noise, vibration, smoke, dust, odor, heat, glare, fumes, electrical interference, or waste run-off outside the dwelling unit or garage;

3. Shall typically operate during the hours of seven a.m. to seven p.m. for outdoor activities and seven a.m. to ten p.m. for indoor activities; except that certain residential uses may be operated on a 24-hour basis;

4.

Instructional classes may be held outside of the main building, a maximum of six students shall be allowed in each session;

5.

Shall not conduct outdoor activities unless the activities are screened from the neighboring property by a solid fence of at least six feet in height;

6. Home occupation uses shall minimize negative impacts on adjoining properties and the residential character of the lot and dwelling shall be maintained. A home occupation that requires a structural alteration of the dwelling to comply with the nonresidential construction code is prohibited, except for modifications to comply with accessibility requirements;

7.

No more than normal household vehicular traffic shall be generated by the home occupation;

8. No home occupation shall generate delivery or pick-up by commercial vehicles more frequently than normal household traffic;

9. No more than two persons who are not residents may be employed on the site at any one time per home occupation; provided, however, the number of employees permitted for child and adult care facilities may exceed two when required by license or state law;

10.

No more than twenty-five percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling shall be used in accommodation of the home occupation, except for licensed boarding home, child and adult personal care facilities;

11.

No equipment, materials, or merchandise associated with the home occupation shall be displayed or stored where visible from any street or public

right-of-way;

12. One sign, not exceeding one square foot in sign area and not internally illuminated shall be permitted for a home occupation. A sign permit shall not be required for a sign complying with this section;

13. Only products made on the premises or incidental to the permitted home occupation may be sold on the premises.

B.

Uses permitted as home occupations that do not require a license include:

1. Consultation office, to preclude physical treatment, of a physician, dentist, licensed massage therapist, or other similar licensed medical practitioner;

2. Office of a lawyer, legal assistant, psychologist, psychiatrist, accountant, business management, professional member associations, bookkeeper, auditor, broker, tax consultant, financial consultant, travel agent, appraiser, architect, landscape architect, interior designer, draftsman, engineer, urban planner, builder, contractor, designer, desktop publisher, advertising professional, biologist, botanist, geologist, archeologist, paleontologist, secretarial and clerical services;

3.

Office of a private investigator, body guard, personal trainer, nutritionist, clown to include magician entertainment, disc jockey;

4.

Office of computer software and hardware consultant to include hardware repair, Web master, data processor, Internet entrepreneur;

5. Office of plumber, electrician, landscape services, locksmith, carpet cleaner, HVAC contractor, painter, janitorial services;

6.

Shop of dressmaker, seamstress, tailor;

7.

Office of salesperson, sales representative, real estate agent, insurance agent, caterer, event planner;

8. Studio of author, composer, artist, painter (fine art), sculptor, photographer;

9.

Studio of music or dance instructor, martial arts instructor, personal trainer, tutor;

10.

Shop for arts and crafts such as making of stained glass, ceramics, jewelry, lapidary work, rug weaving, floral work;

11. Shop for making and repair of portable musical instruments, bicycle repair;

12.

Office of telemarketing service, shuttle service, limousine service;

13.

Occupations similar to those listed above.

14. A no-impact home-based business as defined in Section 229.902 of the Local Government Code.

C. Reserved.

D.

Application for a home occupation license shall be made pursuant to the requirements of Title 5 (Business taxes, licenses and regulations) of this Code.

E. A home occupation shall not include the following uses:

1. Physical or medical treatment of persons or animals, animal hospitals or animal breeding;

2. Beauty shops or barber shops;

3. Carpenter shops;

FW

4. Electrical shops;

5. Massage establishments, other than those employing massage therapists licensed by the state;

6. Plumber shops;

7. Heating and air conditioning shops;

8. Radio shops;

9. Auto repairing or painting;

10. Furniture repairing;

11. Sign painting;

12. Contractors yards;

13. Scrap and salvage services;

14. Restaurants;

15. Cocktail lounges;

16.

Rental outlets;

17.

Equipment sales;

18.

Adult oriented businesses;

18. Adult oriented businesses;

19.

Recycling centers;

20.

Drop-off recycling collection facilities;

21. Businesses involving the repair of any type of internal combustion engine, including equipment repair services.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. No. 17442, § 19, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17577, §§ 5—7, 7-7-2011; Ord. No. 18589, § 3, 11-1-2016; Ord. No. 019806, § 1, 10-14-2025)

20.10.275 - Homeless shelter.

A. Special permits issued for a homeless shelter shall expire without any further action by the city council when: the use for which the permit was issued changes to another use; the facility ceases to operate for one hundred twenty days or more; or the occupancy changes.

B. An application for this shelter shall include an operational plan of the homeless shelter. The operational plan shall provide a description of the intended use and sufficient details to adequately describe the intended operations of the center.

C. The operational plan may include the following:

1. An organizational tree including an estimated total number of professional staff and volunteers that will work at the shelter;

2.

The estimated number of beds to be provided;

WN

3. The estimated average population per month;

4. A description of the services to be provided, such as job placement, drug and alcohol treatment, and other rehabilitative or training services;

5. A description of the population expected to be served, for example women, women and children, single men, families, etc.;

6. Expected length of stay per person;

7. Any other information the applicant believes could be helpful to explain the operation and compatibility of the proposed shelter with the proposed location.

D.

A homeless shelter may not be permitted within one thousand (1,000) feet of another homeless shelter or halfway house.

E. A homeless shelter may not be permitted within one thousand (1,000) feet of a school or daycare.

F. Measurements of distance under this section are taken radially. "Radial" measurement means a measurement taken along the shortest distance between the nearest point of the building site of the halfway house and the nearest point of the building site of another use, or of a protected zoning district boundary.

G.

Within ninety (90) days of the passage of this ordinance the owner or operator of an existing homeless shelter must comply with the registration provisions of Section 20.22.070 and comply with the provisions of Chapter 20.22 Nonconforming Situations.

H. Homeless shelters are subject to the provisions of the City's Nuisance Ordinance codified in Section 9.16. It is unlawful and constitutes a nuisance for any person in the city to carry on any trade, business or occupation injurious to the health of those who reside in the vicinity, or to suffer any substance which shall have that effect to remain on the premises in his possession.

(Ord. No. 18241, § 3, 9-9-2014)

20.10.280 - Infill development.

A. Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to encourage infill development by simplifying procedures for plan approval, provide a more flexible approach to design and development of infill development, permit the conversion or adaptive reuse of buildings and properties, encourage planning and design flexibility and innovations, create a community environment that is enhanced by a mix of residential, commercial, recreational, open space, employment and institutional uses, and assure community compatibility and an efficient use of land and public services. Additionally, the regulations herein serve to supplement the city's tax base by addressing the issue of urban blight and providing relief mechanisms for developing historically underutilized and vacant parcels within the city's urban core which is in keeping with the city's adopted goals and policies.

B.

Location Criteria. An infill development may be located on any parcel of land which meets at least one of the following criteria:

1. Any parcel of land designated within a historic district and developed in compliance with Section 20.20.080.

2. Any parcel of land within the downtown plan area.

3. Any parcel of land annexed prior to 1955.

4. Parcels of land within or that share a common property line to an existing subdivision platted for no less than twenty-five years.

5. Any brownfield or greyfield development.

6. Parcels of land within areas identified by the city's comprehensive plan as G-2 traditional neighborhood and G-7 industrial and/or railyards.

7. Redevelopment of sites previously or currently occupied by civic buildings, public spaces or educational facilities as defined in Section 20.10.145.

C.

Design. Applications for infill development shall be designed in a manner that is consistent and compatible to the massing and character of the surrounding properties and the general design policies and guidelines included in the adopted comprehensive plan. Consistency of massing and character shall be determined as shown on the site plan with typical elevations and proposed construction materials, that the proposed construction is compatible with the overall design features and building development of the neighborhood within which the proposed infill development is located. Design features include, but shall not be limited to, building height, architectural style, building materials, landscape and setbacks. Additionally, applications for infill development must meet all of the following mandatory design requirements and no less than three of the selective design guidelines:

1.

Mandatory Design Requirements: Applications for infill development shall comply with all of the following requirements.

i. Where on-site surface parking is proposed, it shall be located at the rear of the property and when possible accessed via alleyway; or at the side of

the property and screened in accordance with Section 21.50.070(F)(5). On-site surface parking shall not be located in the front yard.

1.

The zoning administrator may grant an exception to this requirement when the following site conditions exist:

a. Exceptional topographical conditions exist that result in an access driveway with a percent grade greater than fourteen percent.

b. Existing development that shares a common property line at the rear of the property.

c. Lots with less than fifty feet of street frontage.

d. Alley right-of-way is unimproved or unpaved.

e. Redevelopment of single family residential parcels in which parking in the rear would not be consistent with existing development along the block face.

2.

When on-street parking directly abutting the property is not present, the applicant may request the installation of on-street parking. The application fee may be subject to reimbursement.

3. Applicants shall have the opportunity to appeal the zoning administrator's decision in the event of a denial any such determination by the zoning administrator in accordance with Section 2.16.040.

ii.

Buildings shall be placed on the parcel such that the principal orientation is toward the main street and the principal entrance is from the

sidewalk.

1. For purposes of this section, main street shall be defined as the street of higher classification within the city's adopted thoroughfare plan. In cases where adjacent streets are of the same classification the zoning administrator shall determine the main street based on the orientation of adjacent buildings along the same block face.

iii.

For proposals abutting existing residential development the front building setback shall not deviate from the average front setback of lots within the same block as the proposed development by more than fifteen percent.

2.

Selective Design Guidelines: Applications for infill development shall comply with no less than three of the following requirements.

i. Any new structure with a ground floor commercial use shall demonstrate that building facades facing public rights-of-way have a majority (fifty percent or more) transparent surface on the ground floor. Transparent surface elements include, but are not limited to, doors and non-opaque windows.

ii.

The percentage of gross floor area divided by the total lot area for infill development projects shall be no less than eighty percent.

iii. The project shall propose a mix of land use categories as classified in Section 20.08.030 (e.g., residential and commercial).

iv. The project shall propose commercial activity within or directly abutting an adjacent street sidewalk. Examples of qualifying commercial activity include, but are not limited to, the placement of outdoor seating and tables or other sidewalk furniture, and stands for the sale of goods and services.

v. The total width of the primary structure shall be greater than or equal to 80 percent of the total lot width along the main street. For the purposes of this calculation, any necessary vehicular access driveway shall be subtracted from the total lot width.

vi.

The project shall demonstrate compliance with one of the architectural styles defined in the Community Design Manual of Plan El Paso.

vii. The height of any proposed infill development shall be equal to at least half the width of the widest abutting street.

viii.

The project includes low impact storm water management including, but not limited to depressed landscaped areas, bioswales, vegetated roofs, pervious pavements, capture and reuse systems.

ix. One of the following is demonstrated:

1. The project is certified by the United States Green Building Council LEED-BD+C, LEED HOMES, LEED-ND certification system or any equivalent, nationally recognized alternative; or

2. The architect or engineer of record is LEED accredited; or

3. The project qualifies for and participates in the City of El Paso Green Building Grant Program.

x. For projects in residential districts the applicant shall demonstrate that the parcel has been vacant or underdeveloped for no less than fifteen years. For purposes of this guideline only, underdeveloped shall be defined as parcels which do not meet the maximum density permitted in the base zoning district.

xi. For projects in residential districts the applicant shall demonstrate that a private frontage as describe in Chapter 21.80, Table 7a through 7e is proposed.

D.

Setback Provisions. The side, front and rear setback requirements of the base zoning district for the property on which the infill development is proposed may be reduced up to one hundred percent by city council.

E. Parking.

1. The minimum parking requirements enumerated in Chapter 20.14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements) shall be automatically reduced by fifty percent for any use within a designated infill development where on-street parking is available, or, after coordination with the streets and maintenance department, is agreed to be installed at the applicant's own cost. If on-street parking is not available along the block face of the proposed development, proof of parking mitigation in the form of a parking reduction impact study indicating that a reduction in the off-street parking requirement will not create a safety hazard or other condition inconsistent with the objectives of Chapter 20.14, or shared parking agreement shall be required for any requests for parking reduction.

2. The minimum parking requirements enumerated in Chapter 20.14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements) may be reduced up to one hundred percent for any use within a designated infill development upon submission of a parking reduction impact study indicating that a reduction in the off- street parking requirement greater than fifty percent will not create a safety hazard or other condition inconsistent with the objectives of Chapter 20.14.

3.

Where on-street parking directly abutting the property is not available, the applicant may request the installation of on-street parking. The application fee may be subject to reimbursement.

F.

Building Height. The maximum building height permitted in the base zoning district may be increased to meet a maximum building height-to- street width ratio of 1:1 for parcels abutting collector and arterial streets.

G.

Landscaping. All applications shall comply with Chapter 18.46. Some applications may be eligible for a reduction in the required landscaping in accordance with Chapter 18.46.090(A)(3).

H.

Density. The maximum number of dwelling units per gross acre permitted in the base zoning district may be increased up to fifty percent for an infill development, or as approved by city council.

I. Lots. There shall be no minimum area requirement for lots within an infill development unless otherwise provided in the ordinance designating the infill development overlay.

J. Use Regulations. Unless the ordinance designating the infill development overlay provides otherwise, a proposed infill development may be approved for any use permitted in the base zoning district in which it is located. However, the ordinance designating an infill development overlay may provide a list of principal uses, accessory uses and prohibited uses pursuant to a specific area plan adopted by the city council.

K. Exclusions. The provision of this section shall not be utilized to legalize any existing development which does not conform to the dimensional standards of the underlying zoning district. Additionally, the following development shall be excluded from the provisions of this section:

1. Any greenfield development.

2. Additions to existing structures on lots restricted to single family residential use which do not increase the density.

3. Structures that encroach into required setbacks built without permits.

(Ord. No. 18688, § 2, 5-30-2017)

Editor's note— Ord. No. 18688, § 2, adopted May 30, 2017, amended Section 20.10.280 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Section 20.10.280, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 16653 § 2(part), 2007.

20.10.290 - Keeping of animals for personal use or enjoyment.

Permitted as an accessory use and not as a business, in all districts, when in compliance with Title 7 of this Code.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.300 - Reserved.

Editor's note— Ord. No. 019734, § 3, 5-28-2025, repealed § 20.10.100, which pertained to laundromats and derived from Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), adopted 2007.

20.10.310 - Liquefied petroleum storage and dispensing.

Liquefied petroleum gas, storage and dispensing as a commercial operation. Special permits for such may be issued only upon recommendation of the fire chief and are subject to revocation at any time upon recommendation of the fire chief or upon finding by the city council that the operation is no longer in the public interest.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.320 - Live-work flex units.

Where permitted in a zoning district, live-work flex units encourage design solutions for compatible mixed uses and are subject to the following restrictions and provisions. Where the live-work development meets the criteria of El Paso City Code Section 20.10.363, the standards found in that section shall supersede.

A. Restricted Category.

1. A live-work flex unit under this category shall be permitted within the apartment, commercial, manufacturing and special purpose zoning districts enumerated in the Table of Permissible Uses, Chapter 20.08 (Permissible Uses) of this title.

2. This category permits a mix of single-family residential and office usage and is only for artisans or professionals with no more than one employee and two customers at any time.

3. Building requirements are the same as for single-family residential uses, commercial signage is disallowed, and no separation is required within the flex unit. It is a wide-open unit, where the workplace and living area are fully integrated, and generally built on their own lots or stacked as in a loft building. These units do not permit walk-in trade of retail or food service.

4. Off-street parking shall satisfy the requirements for a single-family residential unit pursuant to Chapter 20.14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements).

5. The area of the office usage shall be limited to no more than five hundred square feet of gross floor area of the flex unit.

B. Open Category.

1. A live-work flex unit under this category shall only be permitted within the commercial, manufacturing and special purpose districts enumerated in the Table of Permissible Uses, Appendix A of this title.

2.

This category allows a single-family residential unit with any permitted office or commercial use allowed in the base-zoning district.

3. There is no minimum or maximum gross floor area requirement.

wk

4. Building, off-street parking and signage requirements shall satisfy commercial standards for the entire area of the flex unit.

5. There is no limitation on the number of employees or customers at any time at the live-work flex unit.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 019815, § 3, 11-18-2025)

20.10.330 - Loading spaces (serving another property).

A.

Any otherwise permitted use for which the loading requirements of Chapter 20.14 are to be satisfied by loading spaces on property which is located within two hundred fifty feet of the property requiring the loading spaces.

B. Loading spaces serving another property which are located partially or totally within two hundred fifty feet of the property requiring the loading spaces. (Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.340 - Manufactured home parks.

A. Each manufactured home space shall have a minimum area of at least three thousand square feet, with a minimum width of thirty feet and minimum depth of ninety feet.

B. Minimum distance between structures:

1. The minimum distance between manufactured home structures, including a garage or carport, shall be ten feet;

2. The minimum distance between manufactured home structures, including a garage or carport, and manufactured home park community buildings shall be ten feet;

3. The minimum distance between a structure and interior access roads shall be ten feet.

C.

Open space consisting of at least fifty percent of the lot area of an interior lot or forty percent of the lot area for a corner lot shall be provided.

D. A minimum of five percent of the gross site area of the park shall be devoted to recreational facilities and located in a central location. Community buildings and community use facilities, including adult recreation and child play areas, swimming pools, may be included in computing the area of recreational facilities. However, vehicle-parking areas shall not be used in such computation.

E. Screening. There shall be a screening wall complying with Chapter 20.16 at the perimeter of the manufactured home park. This wall shall be six feet in height at the rear property line and any interior side property lines, and forty-two inches in height at the front property line and any side property lines abutting a side street, except for necessary ingress and egress and except within twenty feet of an intersection, where the maximum height is thirty-six

inches.

F. There shall be a minimum of two hundred cubic feet of storage space per manufactured home unit located either in community accessory buildings accessible to all manufactured home park units or in individual accessory buildings at each manufactured home stand.

G. Accessory buildings may be attached to the manufactured home or if separate shall be not less than five feet away from the manufactured home. All additions to manufactured homes shall be engineered and built to comply with currently applicable manufactured home construction standards and must be of such design that the structural components could be disassembled upon removal of the manufactured home unit.

H.

One off-street parking space for each manufactured home unit and one off-street parking space for guest parking for each three manufactured home units shall be provided within the manufactured home park in accordance with the standards provided in Chapter 20.14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading). The height limit for any structure intended for occupancy in the manufactured home park shall be thirty-five feet.

I.

J. Internal streets and all traffic control devices and street name signs within a manufactured home park shall be privately owned, built, and maintained. Internal streets shall be designed for safe and convenient access to all spaces and to common facilities.

1. Internal streets shall be kept open and free of obstruction to allow emergency vehicles to have access to all spaces and to common facilities;

2. Internal streets in a manufactured home park shall be constructed and maintained to city standards. They shall be kept free of cracks, holes, and other hazards;

3. An internal street roadway shall have a minimum width of thirty-five feet;

4. All internal streets shall be named and all manufactured homes shall be numbered to conform to block numbers on adjacent public streets. Street name signs shall be of a color and size contrasting with those used for public streets. Street name signs and address numbers shall comply with city code requirements;

5. Each internal street shall be provided with street lighting.

K.

Tenant Responsibilities. Each park tenant shall maintain the tenant's manufactured home and lot in compliance with the following:

1. The manufactured home shall be properly placed on its stand and anchored in a manner approved by the city and state. All utilities shall be properly installed in accordance with the instructions of the park's owner or operator, and in accordance with the city code. The building official has the right to refuse to issue permits to connect a manufactured home up to utilities until the tenant or owner or operator of the park shows proof that the manufactured home has been anchored in accordance with city and state regulations;

2. A noncombustible skirting shall be installed around the manufactured home. Such skirting may include any vents, screens, and/or openings necessary for utility and mechanical system hookups;

3. The skirting, and any porches, stairways, awnings and other additions shall be constructed and installed per city code requirements, and maintained in good repair. All requirements of the building code pertaining to single-family dwellings for like structures or additions shall be applicable;

4.

The space beneath a mobile shall not be used for storage of flammable or combustible items;

5. A person commits an offense if the person is a park tenant and knowingly fails to maintain the person's manufactured home and lot in compliance with this section;

6. A person commits an offense if the person owns or operates a park and knowingly allows a violation of this section by a tenant.

L.

Utilities. All utilities shall be installed in compliance with applicable code requirements.

M. Recreational Vehicles in Parks.

1. A maximum of five percent of the gross area of a park may be dedicated to overnight or short-term use (no longer than fourteen consecutive days) by recreational vehicles.

2. Such portion of the park shall be clearly delineated and shall comply with all requirements of Title 20 for recreational vehicle parks except the requirement for a minimum number of spaces.

3. A person commits an offense if the person owns or operates a park knowingly allows a violation of this section by another person.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.350 - Manufacturing uses (not listed) in M-Districts.

A. Light manufacturing uses similar to those listed in Chapter 20.08 (Permissible Uses) which do not create any more danger to health and safety in surrounding areas and which do not create any more offensive noise, vibration, smoke, dust, lint, odor, heat, glare or electrical impulse than that which is generally associated with these uses, may also be permitted in the zoning district, subject to a determination by the zoning administrator in accordance with the provisions of Section 20.08.040.

B. The administrator may require an engineering report describing the nature of a process or use and probable impact at property lines.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.360 - Mixed-use development.

Where section 20.10.363 (Mixed-Use Residential or Apartment Development) applies, it supersedes any requirements under 20.10.360 that may be in conflict.

A. Special Development (S-D).

1. Design Requirements—Open Space and Recreation Area. The amount and arrangement of open space and recreation area should be in accord with standards of the comprehensive plan and the purposes of the design of the development, including preservation of natural landscape, active recreation, passive recreation, and improvement of view as may be appropriate to a particular case. Both private and common use open space are to be encouraged. Open space proposed for common or general public access shall be so designated on the development permit and subdivision plat. Satisfactory provision for the maintenance of common open space shall be provided in accordance with the procedure in Chapter 20.04.

2. Design Requirements—Reservation of Environment. In all S-D development, the elements of natural environment including existing vegetation, arroyos, flood-prone areas, mountains, steep slopes and other features shall be considered in planning the design and layout of buildings, location of streets and preservation of open spaces, in order to further the preservation of the natural environment.

3.

The provisions of Chapter 20.20 (Historic Designations) where applicable, shall continue to apply in addition to the provisions of this section.

4.

Perimeter Treatment. The perimeter of the planned development shall be designed to ensure compatibility with adjacent existing or proposed development, if known, by provision of compatible uses and structures, setbacks, masonry walls, landscaping or other treatment.

5. Height Regulations. No building shall exceed forty-five feet in height, except as follows:

a. As provided in Chapter 20.12;

b. Where the development would consist of twenty-five acres or more; or

c. Where, after city plan commission recommendation, city council approves an exception to these height restrictions under the following conditions:

i. The authorized height is compatible with the uses, appearance and environment of adjacent areas,

ii. The applicant submits a traffic study describing traffic volumes and impact of proposed development on adjacent streets,

iii. The council finds that the proposed development mitigates those traffic impacts and provides for an acceptable level of service,

iv. The site is located on an arterial street (collector, minor or major) that is served by a regularly scheduled mass transit line, and

v. Any other condition reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public.

6.

Review Standards for Establishment of S-D District.

a. The city plan commission and the city council shall review the conformity of the proposed development or redevelopment with the comprehensive plan. The commission and the city council shall study the relationship between uses of high intensity permitted in the S-D district and uses of low intensity, existing or future, outside the proposed S-D district to ascertain compatibility, but shall not reduce the amount of such uses below the maximum established by the section unless such uses create immediate land use conflicts along project boundary lines.

b. Where the development is for single-family detached dwellings that meet all minimum requirements set forth in Chapter 20.12 (Density and Dimensional Standards) a detailed site development plan shall not be required. Where the development is for apartments, or mixed-use residential development that meet all minimum requirements set forth in Chapter 20.12 (Density and Dimensional Standards) and Section 20.10.363, a detailed site development plan shall not be required.

c. Where the development is for single-family detached dwellings, apartments, or mixed-use residential development, but does not meet the requirements set forth in Chapter 20.12 (Density and Dimensional Standards); or where the development proposes permitted uses other than single-family detached dwellings, a detailed site development plan shall be submitted in accordance with Chapter 20.04. Additional reasonable conditions may be recommended by the city plan commission and approved by the city council in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

B. Union Plaza (U-P).

1. Applicability. The provisions of this section will apply to all parcels of land within the "U-P" Union Plaza District. Where the development is for apartments or mixed-use residential development that meet all minimum requirements set forth in Chapter 20.12 (Density and Dimensional Standards) and Section 20.10.363, a detailed site development plan shall not be required.

2. Development Standards.

a. Off-Street Parking. Off-street parking requirements of Chapter 20.14 shall not apply to properties in the district. Additionally, surface parking lots shall be prohibited in the district.

b. Drive-thru facilities are prohibited in the district.

c. In the district, height limits of buildings or structures within a seven-hundred-foot radius of any part of the facade of the Union Depot shall not exceed forty feet, except where the development is for apartments or mixed-use residential development that meet all requirements set forth in Section 20.10.363, the height shall not exceed forty-five feet.

3. Plans and Permits Required. Prior to the issuance of any building or related permits for any new construction or renovation of the exterior of existing building(s), drawings and applications shall be reviewed for approval by the city manager or designee, to ensure that the proposed construction complies with the architectural and design guidelines described in this section. Application shall be reviewed within ten business days upon receipt of a complete application. The city manager or designee may request assistance of other departments to review drawings and applications.

4. Architectural and Design Guidelines. The purpose of these guidelines is to protect the district from unsightly construction that would ultimately diminish the appeal of the district. All applications for redevelopment of existing buildings or structures or new construction must comply with the Union Plaza Architectural and Design Guidelines. Copies of the Union Plaza Architectural and Design Guidelines are on file in the planning and inspections department. Where conflict exists between this section and the adopted design guidelines, section 20.10.360.B shall supersede.

5. Application Requirements. In addition to those items required for the application for a building permit, a detailed site development plan is required prior to development within the district. The process for application and approval shall be in accordance with Title 20, Chapter 20.04, Article III (Detailed Site Development Plan Approval Process). The requirement for a detailed site development plan shall only apply to new construction or additions to existing structures. Where the development is for apartments or mixed-use residential development that meet all minimum requirements set forth in Chapter 20.12 (Density and Dimensional Standards) and Section 20.10.363, a detailed site development plan shall not be required.

C.

Planned Residential (PR-1 and PR-2).

1.

Open Space and Recreation Area. The amount and arrangement of open space and recreation area should be in accord with the comprehensive

plan and the purposes of the design of the development, including preservation of natural landscape, active recreation, passive recreation, and improvement of view as may be appropriate to a particular case. Both private and common use open space are to be encouraged. Open space proposed for common or general public access shall be so designated on the detailed site development plan and subdivision plat. Satisfactory provision shall be made for the maintenance of common open space in accordance with the procedure in Chapter 20.04.

2. Preservation of the Environment. In all P-R developments, the elements of natural environment, including existing vegetation, arroyos, flood- prone areas, mountains, steep slopes and other features, shall be considered in planning and design and layout of buildings, location of streets and preservation of open spaces, in order to further the preservation of the natural environment.

3. Perimeter Treatment.

a.

The perimeter of the planned development shall be designed to insure compatibility with adjacent existing or potential development by provision of compatible uses and structures; masonry walls; and landscaping or other treatment.

b. A minimum setback of ten feet plus two additional feet of separation for each story above two shall be maintained between any structure and the outside boundary line of the planned residential development.

4.

Review Standards for Establishment of P-R District.

a. The city plan commission and the city council shall review the conformity of the proposed development or redevelopment with the comprehensive plan. The commission and the city council shall study the relationship between uses of high intensity permitted in the P-R district and uses of low intensity, existing or future, outside the proposed P-R district to ascertain compatibility, but shall not reduce the amount of such uses below the maximum established by this section unless such uses create immediate land use conflicts along project boundary lines.

b. Where the development is for single-family detached dwellings that meet all minimum requirements set forth in Chapter 20.12 (Density and Dimensional Standards) a detailed site development plan shall not be required. Where the development is for apartments, or mixed-use residential development that meet all minimum requirements set forth in Chapter 20.12 (Density and Dimensional Standards) and Section 20.10.363, a detailed site development plan shall not be required.

c. Where the development is for single-family detached dwellings but does not meet the requirements set forth in Chapter 20.12 (Density and Dimensional Standards); or where the development proposes permitted uses other than single-family detached dwellings, a detailed site development shall be submitted in accordance with Chapter 20.04. Additional reasonable conditions may be recommended by the city plan commission and approved by the city council in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

D. Planned Commercial (P-C).

1. Ownership Control.

a. The land in a P-C district shall be developed as a unified whole. All owners shall be included as joint applicants and all approvals shall bind all owners.

b.

A building or land shall be used only in accordance with an approved detailed site development plan conforming with Chapter 20.04 and only

for the uses permitted in Chapter 20.08, provided that the district shall be planned and developed as a unit, subject to the additional requirements and provisions of this section.

2. General Procedures—Plans Required.

a. Establishment of a P-C planned commercial district shall follow the procedures for changes and amendments of Chapter 20.04, including notice and hearings, recommendations by the city plan commission and action by the city council. A detailed site development plan complying with the requirements of Chapter 20.04 shall be required, except where the development is for apartments or mixed-use residential development that meet all minimum requirements set forth in Chapter 20.12 (Density and Dimensional Standards) and Section 20.10.363, a detailed site development plan shall not be required.

b. If the project is to be accomplished as a series of development units, a detailed site development plan of a proposed unit shall be submitted with a general concept plan and a schedule of phasing provided.

c. The proposed development shall follow all applicable procedures, standards, and requirements of this chapter and other regulations governing the subdivision of land. Where a plat is required, no building permit shall be issued until a final plat of the proposed development, or part thereof, is approved by the city plan commission, filed and recorded.

3. Supplemental Height and Bulk Standards.

a. When a community or regional shopping center is a part of a planned development of one hundred fifty acres or more, or where there are unique features of topography, access, and location with respect to existing and future development to justify such action, the city plan commission may recommend and the city council may approve height limits for community and regional shopping centers in excess of those specified in Chapter 20.12.

b. The floor area ratio for a neighborhood shopping center or area shall not exceed 0.30. A maximum floor area ratio may be specified for community and regional shopping centers or general commercial areas as a condition of development permit approval.

4.

Compatibility with Nearby Properties. The development shall be designed to promote harmonious relationships with surrounding adjacent and nearby properties, developed and undeveloped, particularly in larger centers or where tall buildings are to be located in the vicinity of buildings of low height, and to this end may employ such design techniques as may be appropriate to a particular site, including location of building, orientation, spacing and setback of buildings, location of access points, size and location of signs, open spaces and parking areas, grading, landscaping and screening.

5. Access. The principal means of access shall be from arterial or collector streets. For a major shopping center, principal access shall be from at least one major arterial street. In no case shall the principal means of access be from a minor residential street. Access points shall be designed to minimize traffic hazard and congestion and shall be approved by the city engineer.

6. Internal Circulation. The design for internal circulation shall be appropriately related to access points and provide for safe and efficient movement of vehicles and pedestrians with special attention to reduction of crossing conflicts, improvement of visibility, convenience of pickup areas, traffic signs and speed controls.

7.

Paved Areas. Service drives or other areas shall be provided for off-street loading and in such a way that in the process of loading or unloading, no truck will block the passage of other vehicles on the service drive or extend into any fire lane or other public or private drive or street used for traffic circulation. The drives, parking areas, loading areas, and walks shall be paved with hard, all-weather surface material meeting applicable specifications of Chapter 20.14.

8.

Refuse. Refuse containers or refuse storage areas shall be hidden from general public view, either from within or outside the center, by means of fences, walls, or landscape planting.

9.

Findings Required of City Plan Commission. Before recommending approval of a P-C planned commercial district, the plan commission shall make specific findings as follows:

a. That the location and design of the commercial areas are appropriate and are in compliance with the requirements and purpose of the P-C district, and specifically that there is adequate provision for traffic to and from the center, without undue congestion, on existing streets or on streets schedules to be completed by the time the center is to be opened;

b. That a proposed construction timing schedule has been approved by the commission and is recommended for adoption by the city council;

c. Specific conditions, if any, which should be imposed, including recommendations to insure construction of improvements.

10.

Abandonment After Final Approval.

a. In the event that the detailed site development plan is approve by the city council and thereafter the applicant or his successor abandons said plan, or in the event the applicant or his successor fails to commence the development of a specific unit within four years after final approval has been granted, then such approval of the detailed site plan shall terminate and be deemed null and void unless such time period is extended by the city council upon recommendation by the city plan commission upon written application by the applicant or his successor.

b. Once terminated, a new detailed site development plan must be approved following the procedures of Chapter 20.04, including public hearing, prior to issuance of a building permit or permits for the project.

E. Planned Industrial (P-I).

1.

Compatibility with Nearby Properties. The industrial development shall be designed to promote harmonious relationships with surrounding adjacent and nearby properties, developed and undeveloped, and to this end may employ such design techniques as may be appropriate to a particular case, including location of permitted elements, orientation, spacing and setback of buildings, maintenance of natural vegetation, location of access points, size and location of signs, open spaces and parking areas, grading, landscaping and services.

2. Enclosed Buildings. All uses shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building of permanent and durable construction, with no open storage of raw, in process, or finished material and supplies or waste material. Finished or semi-finished products manufactured on the premises may be stored in the open if screened from the street or other abutting property by a solid masonry wall not less than six feet or more than eight feet in height. This screening must be located behind any required landscaping. Screening may be waived by the city council where it is found the screening will not service the purpose of blocking the view from a street or from a more restrictive zoning district.

3.

Parking. Adequate parking space shall be provided off the street for all employees and visitors to the building, if necessary, in excess of the minimum requirements of Chapter 20.14. No parking shall be permitted in the required front yard or within ten feet of the boundary of any residential district and no storage of materials, equipment, or products shall be permitted in any part of a required front yard.

4. Loading.

a. Off-street loading space for individual uses shall be provided in accord with the provisions of Chapter 20.14. Loading operations shall be conducted within a building or screened from general public view from a front street where possible, but may be conducted at the side or rear of buildings whether or not facing a street.

b.

Where an industrial tract abuts railroad property containing a spur track on the rear or side property line, railroad loading docks or the building itself may extend to the property line for the purpose of receiving service from the railroad spur tracks.

5.

Paved Areas. Service drives or other areas shall be provided for off-street loading and in such a way that in the process of loading or unloading, no truck will block the passage of other vehicles on the service drive or extend into any fire lane or other public or private drive or street used for traffic circulation. The drives, parking areas, loading areas, and walks shall be paved with hard, all-weather surface material meeting applicable specifications of Chapter 20.14.

F. Special Residential Revitalization (SRR).

1. This district is established in recognition that developments containing both residential and commercial uses can create an appealing and vital urban environment when carefully designed. Developments approved for this district shall be designed to eliminate potential use conflicts through creative design methods. The SRR district allows for mixing residential environments with workplaces and services. Development in the SRR district must accommodate transportation systems, surrounding environments and pedestrian movements.

2. District Boundaries. This district is created to maintain a compatible mix of residential and neighborhood commercial uses within the area known as South El Paso. For purposes of this section, South El Paso is defined as the area south of Paisano Drive, and lying between Santa Fe Street and Cotton Street. No applications for SRR zoning may be requested outside of South El Paso.

3. Off-street parking requirements found in Chapter 20.14 shall not apply in this district; loading spaces, however, shall be required to comply.

G.

Residential, General and Industrial Mixed Use Districts (RMU, GMU and IMU). Uses permitted in a mixed-use development are as approved by city council through a master zoning plan. In an RMU zoning district where the development is entirely for apartments or entirely for mixed-use residential development that meet all minimum requirements set forth in Chapter 20.12 (Density and Dimensional Standards) and Section 20.10.363, these uses shall be permitted without approval of a master zoning plan. A mixed-use development may be authorized to encourage use schemes such as but not limited to, residential, entertainment, medical, and employment centers. The following principles and requirements shall apply to a mixed-use development and shall serve as the basis for approval of a master zoning plan.

1. General Design Principles. These design principles shall serve as guidelines only, and compliance with any guideline within a mixed-use development shall be determined on a case by case basis as part of the master zoning plan and mixed use development plan approval. It is not intended that every mixed-use development conform to all or any set number of the enumerated design guidelines.

a. Development Perspective.

i. That the natural infrastructure and visual character of the development area be retained as derived from existing topography, riparian corridors and other environmentally sensitive areas.

ii. That the development strategy utilized encourages infill and redevelopment in parity with new and existing neighborhoods.

iii. That proposed development contiguous to urban areas be organized as town centers and neighborhoods, and be integrated with the existing urban pattern.

iv. That proposed development noncontiguous to urban areas be organized in the pattern of an isolated community consisting of a complete town center serving the neighborhood(s).

v. That a mixture of housing types and densities be distributed throughout the mixed-use development.

vi.

That transportation corridors be planned and reserved in coordination with land use patterns.

vii.

That natural or man-made green corridors and open space areas be used to define and connect neighborhoods to other facilities within the development, and that these areas allow for connectivity outside of the development where feasible.

viii. That the development include a framework of transit, pedestrian and bicycle systems that provide alternatives to the automobile.

ix. That neighborhoods with town centers be the preferred pattern of development and that developments specializing in single use be discouraged.

x. That neighborhoods be compact, pedestrian-friendly, and mixed use.

xi.

That ordinary activity of daily living occurs within walking distance of most dwellings.

xii.

That interconnected networks of streets be designed to disperse and reduce the length of vehicle trips.

xiii.

That within neighborhoods, a range of housing types and price levels be provided to accommodate people of diverse ages and incomes.

xiv. That appropriate building densities and land use be provided within walking distance of transit stops.

xv. That civic, institutional and commercial activity be embedded, and not isolated, in the development.

xvi.

That a range of open space including parks, squares, and playgrounds be distributed within the development.

xvii.

That a development have sufficient size to accommodate the mixed-use concentration of uses.

b.

Building Perspective.

i. That buildings and landscaping contribute to the physical definition of streets as civic places.

ii. That the design of streets and buildings reinforce safe environments.

iii.

That architecture and landscape design grow from local climate, topography, history and building practice.

iv. That public gathering spaces be provided in locations that reinforce community identity.

v. That the preservation and renewal of historic buildings be facilitated.

vi. That principal buildings and facades, where possible, be located parallel to the frontage line to encourage a community-friendly environment.

2.

General Design Elements. A mixed-use development is characterized by any combination of the design elements described below. These design elements shall serve as guidelines only, and compliance with any design element within a mixed-use development shall be determined on a case- by-case basis as part of the master zoning plan and mixed-use development plan approval. It is not intended that every mixed-use development conform to all or any set number of the enumerated design elements.

a. Neighborhoods limited in size and oriented toward pedestrian activity.

b. A variety of housing types, jobs, shopping, services, and public facilities.

c.

Residences, shops, workplaces, and other buildings interwoven within the neighborhood, all within close proximity.

d. A network of interconnecting streets and blocks that maintain respect for the natural landscape.

e.

Natural features and undisturbed areas that are incorporated into the open space of the neighborhood.

f. A coordinated transportation system with a hierarchy of appropriately designed facilities for pedestrians, bicycles, public transit and automotive vehicles.

g. Well-configured squares, plazas, greens, landscaped streets, preserves, greenbelts, or parks dedicated to the collective social activity, recreation, and visual enjoyment of the neighborhood.

h. Buildings, spaces, and other features that act as landmarks, symbols, and focal points for community identity.

i. Compatibility of buildings and other improvements as determined by their arrangement, bulk, form, character and landscaping to establish a livable and harmonious environment.

j. Classification of uses deploying a range from rural-to-urban to arrange in useful order the typical context groupings of natural and urban areas to ensure compatibility of land uses.

3.

Architectural Objectives. As part of the review of the mixed-use development plan the architectural design shall achieve the following objectives: a. Architectural compatibility;

b.

Human scale design;

c. Integration of uses;

d. Encouragement of pedestrian activity;

e. Buildings that relate to and are oriented toward the street and surrounding buildings;

f. Residential scale buildings in any mixed residential area;

g. Buildings that contain special architectural features to signify entrances to the mixed-use development; and

h. Buildings that focus activity on a neighborhood open space, square or plaza.

4.

Roadway Design. The roadway designs, whether public or private, used within a mixed-use development may vary depending on the proposed function of the roadway, the anticipated land uses, and the anticipated traffic load. A variety of designs to lend character to the neighborhood are encouraged. The requirements of Title 19 (Subdivisions) of this Code shall apply in all instances.

5. Parking. The off-street parking requirements in Chapter 20.14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements) of this title shall apply for purposes of calculating required spaces.

Community-parking facilities or shared parking shall be encouraged in lieu of traditional off-street parking design. This concept would permit the collocation of required parking for individual uses in order to promote pedestrian activity within the neighborhood. In instances where shared parking is proposed, a shared parking study shall be reviewed by the city along with any traffic engineering and planning data that are appropriate to the establishment of parking requirements for the uses proposed. A shared parking study shall include, but not be limited to, estimates of parking requirements based on recommendations in studies such as those from the Urban Land Institute, the Institute of Traffic Engineers, or the Traffic Institute, and based on data collected from uses or combinations of uses that are the same or comparable to the proposed uses. The shared parking analysis shall be based on the mixture of uses and corresponding peak demand for all uses. The study shall document the source of data used to develop recommendations.

6. Setbacks. Properties within a mixed-use development shall be allowed zero setbacks for all uses, unless otherwise required by the city council as part of the review of the master zoning plan.

7. Landscaping. Uses within a mixed-use development shall not be required to conform to the landscaping requirements of Title 18 (Building and Construction) of the El Paso City Code. Landscaping, streetscape, and other green areas proposed within the mixed-use development shall be shown and considered as part of the master zoning plan and mixed-use development plan approval process.

(Ord. 16915 § 4, 2008; Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17442, § 20, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17801, § 4, 6-5-2012, eff. 6-11-2012; Ord. No. 19244, § 14, 10-12-2021; Ord. No. 019578, § 4, 12-12-2023; Ord. No. 019815, § 3, 11-18-2025)

20.10.363 - Mixed-use residential or apartment development.

A. Mixed-Use Residential Development. Developments not meeting the criteria listed below shall not be considered mixed-use residential and shall be required to meet the requirements of the base zoning or use requirements.

1. New Mixed-Use Residential Development.

a.

This section applies only to a mixed-use residential development project initiated on or after September 1, 2025.

b. The standards in this section supersede the base zoning districts standards.

c.

To meet the requirements of a mixed-use residential development, the parcel to be developed shall meet all of the following requirements: i. Shall consist of residential and nonresidential uses; and

ii. Minimum of sixty-five percent of the total square footage of the development shall be utilized for residential uses.

2. Conversion of Existing Buildings to Mixed-Use Residential Development.

a. This section applies only to a building proposed to be converted to mixed-use residential use in which a building permit was submitted on or after September 1, 2025.

b.

Conversion of an existing building to mixed use residential development shall meet the following requirements:

i.

Is a building that is being used for office, retail, or warehouse uses;

ii. Minimum of sixty-five percent of the total square footage of the development shall be utilized for residential uses and a minimum of sixty-five percent of each floor area shall be used for residential uses; and

iii. The proposed building to be converted shall be five years old or more.

c.

The following shall not be required for the conversion of an existing building to mixed use residential development:

i. Traffic impact analysis;

ii. Construction of improvements or payment of a fee in connection with mitigating traffic effects; or

iii. Extension, upgrade, replacement, or oversizing of a utility facility except as necessary to provide the minimum capacity needed to serve the proposed converted building.

B. Apartment Development.

1.

This section applies only to an apartment development project initiated on or after September 1, 2025.

2. The standards in this section supersede the base zoning districts standards.

3.

Conversion of existing buildings to apartment development.

a. This section applies only to a building proposed to be converted to apartment use in which a building permit was submitted on or after September

1, 2025.

b. Conversion of an existing building to apartment development shall meet the following requirements:

i. Is a building that is being used for office, retail, or warehouse uses; and

ii. The proposed building to be converted shall be five years old or more.

c.

The following shall not be required for the conversion of an existing building to apartment development:

i. Traffic impact analysis;

ii. Construction of improvements or payment of a fee in connection with mitigating traffic effects; or

iii. Extension, upgrade, replacement, or oversizing of a utility facility except as necessary to provide the minimum capacity needed to serve the proposed converted building.

(Ord. No. 019815, § 3, 11-18-202)

20.10.365 - Mobile service units.

A. Mobile service activities may be conducted only on approved parking surfaces, in zoning districts where the defined use is permitted.

B.

An operator permit shall be required for each company providing mobile services. The permit shall be for a period of one year and the fee shall be as

established by city council. A renewal application must be filed with the permit official thirty days prior to the expiration of the current permit. All operator permit applications meeting code requirements shall be approved within fifteen days of receipt.

C. The permit application shall include submittal of specifications of the mobile unit and a written authorization form signed by the property owner for each

proposed location.

D. No part of the mobile service unit shall be located nearer than seventy-five feet from a residentially-zoned district.

E. The mobile service unit shall not operate in a manner which:

1. Obstructs on-site circulation, visibility or convenient ingress and egress;

2. Subjects the occupants of adjacent buildings to unacceptable noise levels; or

3. Deposits on the parking lot surface any toxic, hazardous and/or nonbiodegradable materials of any type.

F. All fluids collected from any vehicle must be disposed of in compliance with federal, state and local laws.

G.

All equipment utilized by the mobile unit shall be mounted on, carried or transported by a self-powered vehicle.

=

H. No mobile service activities shall be conducted on city streets or rights-of-way.

I. In addition to other penalties imposed by the city code, any violation of the ordinance codified in this section or other applicable laws, codes or regulations shall subject the holder to suspension or revocation of their permit.

J. Sales and service shall only be permitted on private parking lots, occupied by a single owner. Sales to the general public and sales other than to fleets of vehicles are expressly prohibited.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17235, § 3, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. 17442, § 21, 10-26-2010)

20.10.370 - Mountain development.

A.

Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to promote the following city objectives within mountain development areas:

1. To protect significant natural features of the mountain development area and preserve the city's unique visual setting as part of the comprehensive plan;

2. To provide an alternative approach to conventional flat land development by allowing transfer of residential densities through clustering of dwellings in order to preserve larger areas of open space;

3. To minimize scarring and disturbances of the natural character of the mountain development area through control of grading and cut/fill operations as defined in the grading ordinance;

4.

To control water runoff and soil erosion;

5. To provide a safe means of ingress and egress for vehicular and pedestrian traffic to and within the mountain development area;

6. To encourage sound engineering practices related to mountain development.

B.

Minimum District Area. The minimum area for a mountain development district where common or public open space is to be provided shall be one acre. Extensions to the original district, from a common boundary, may be considered in increments of less than one acre, provided, however, that all other requirements are observed.

C. Ownership Control. Where required, the common open space shall be owned by an incorporated or unincorporated association to assure that it will be permanently maintained in its natural state. Open space may be made public if dedicated or transferred in trust to the city and the city council accepts such dedication or transfer without affecting any other provision of this title.

D. Density Permitted. Where the development is for apartments or mixed-use residential development that meet all minimum requirements set forth in Section 20.10.363, density shall be as stated in Appendix B. Where the development is for single-family detached small lot development that meet all minimum requirements set forth in Section 20.10.625, density shall be as stated in Appendix B. For other permitted uses, the maximum dwelling units per gross acre shall be calculated based on the percentage average slope of the property as follows:

Maximum Density per Gross Acre 7.0 6.0 5.0 4.0 3.0 2.5

Percent Average Slope

0 to 5

5.1 to 10

10.1 to 15

15.1 to 20

20.1 to 25

25.1 to 30

2.0 1.5 1.0

30.1 to 35

35.1 to 40

40.1 or more

E.

Open Space Required. To retain the significant natural features of the mountain development area, common, public or private open space, or a combination thereof, shall be provided as part of a proposed development. The minimum amount of open space to be provided shall be based on the percent average slope of the property as shown below. The required open space within a mountain development district shall be shown on the subdivision plat and detailed site plan.

Open Space Required/Percent of Total Gross Acreage to Remain Percent Average Slope Undisturbed 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60

Percent Average Slope

0 to 5

5.1 to 10

10.1 to 15

15.1 to 20

20.1 to 25

25.1 to 30

30.1 to 35

35.1 to 40

40.1 or more

F. Architectural Design Standards. Building and construction materials within a mountain development district shall meet the following architectural design standards:

1. Mirrored surfaces or any treatments that change ordinary glass into a mirrored surface shall be prohibited;

2. Bright untarnished copper or other metallic surfaces shall be treated to reduce reflections;

3.

Materials used for exterior surfaces of all structures shall blend in color, hue, and tone with the surrounding natural desert setting to avoid high

contrast;

4.

Development design and construction techniques shall blend scale, form and visual character into the natural landform, and shall minimize exposed scars;

5. Exterior lighting shall be low scale and directed downward, recessed, or shielded so that the light source is not visible from the adjacent

developments;

6. Reflective building materials shall be prohibited;

7. No exterior paint colors shall be used which have a light-reflecting value (LRV) greater than forty percent. (The LRV of a paint is available from paint manufacturers and it measures the amount of light reflected by a certain color.)

G.

Property Development Standards. The following property development standards shall apply to all land, buildings and structures within a mountain development district:

1. Subdivision Plat. Buildings and structures in a mountain development district shall be erected only on land where a plat or replat approved by the city plan commission, has been filed of record, and indicates compliance with the provisions of this section. Each attached or detached single-family dwelling must be platted on an individual lot prior to issuance of occupancy permits;

2.

Site Plan. A detailed site development plan complying with all of the requirements of Chapter 20.04 (Administrative Review Procedures) shall be required for all property within a mountain development district, except where a development is for single-family detached dwellings meeting the minimum yard requirements of Chapter 20.12 (Density and Dimensional Regulations) and where common or public open space is provided to satisfy the open space requirements of this section. If a development is to be undertaken in a series of phases, a development schedule indicating the proposed phasing shall accompany the required detailed site plan. Where the development is for apartments, or mixed-use residential development that meet all minimum requirements set forth in Chapter 20.12 (Density and Dimensional Standards) and Section 20.10.363, a detailed site development plan shall not be required;

3. Common or Public Open Space. Where required, the total amount and distribution of common or public open space shall be shown on the detailed site development plan and subdivision plat and shall be expressed as the percent of the site which will remain in its natural state. Satisfactory provisions for assuring continued retention of the common or public open space shall be provided;

4. Percent Slope. The percent slope of a proposed mountain development used to determine the common open space shall be shown on the required detailed site development plan and subdivision plat;

5.

Perimeter Treatment. The perimeter treatment of the proposed mountain development shall be designed to insure compatibility with adjacent

existing or potential development by provision of compatible land uses and structures. A minimum setback of ten feet of separation for each story or fraction thereof shall be maintained between any structure and the outside boundary of the proposed mountain development.

H.

Private Streets. Where authorized by the city plan commission in approving a subdivision plat, streets may be privately owned.

I. Preservation of the Environment. In all mountain developments, existing vegetation, animal life, arroyos, floodprone areas, steep slopes, and other natural features shall be considered in the planning, design and layout of buildings, service areas and location of streets in the allocation of open spaces reserve the natural environment.

J.

Right-of-Way and Pavement Widths. The right-of-way and pavement widths for internal ways, streets and alleys within and adjacent to the proposed mountain development shall be:

1.

Determined from the standards contained in the city's current subdivision regulations and any applicable ordinance governing streets;

2. In conformity with the estimated needs of the entire mountain development and the traffic to be generated thereby;

3. Adequate and sufficient in size, location and design to accommodate the maximum traffic, parking, loading needs and the access for firefighting equipment vehicles while preventing undue scarring and grading.

K.

Off-Street Parking and Loading. The minimum requirements for off-street parking and loading shall be satisfied as set forth in Chapter 20.14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations).

L. Utilities and Public Services. Every mountain development shall be adequately served by essential utilities and public services such as water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, police, fire and other similar services.

M. Property Grading Standards. Grading in a mountain development shall be in accordance with Chapter 18.44 (Grading) of this Code.

(Ord. 16905 § 1, 2008; Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 19244, § 15, 10-12-2021; Ord. No. 019815, § 3, 11-18-2025)

20.10.380 - Reserved.

Editor's note— Ord. No. 019734, § 3, 5-28-2025, repealed § 20.10.380, which pertained to multifamily dwellings and derived from Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), adopted 2007.

20.10.385 - Natural open space.

A.

Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to promote the following city objectives within the mountain, hillside, arroyo, bosque, and desert flatland areas, as well as other natural open space areas:

1. To protect and promote ecologically sensitive areas in conformance with the goals and policies of the city's comprehensive plan and open space master plan;

2. To minimize scarring and disturbance of the natural environment, plant and wildlife habitat and visual character of the mountain, hillside, arroyo, bosque, and desert flatland areas through prohibition of development;

3. To control water runoff and soil erosion and to assure continuation of the existing natural drainage system;

4.

To preserve land that, if disturbed, may be susceptible to flooding and soil erosion due to steep slopes and runoff;

5. To provide a safe means of ingress and egress for non-motorized traffic to and within the mountain, hillside, arroyo, bosque, and desert flatland areas;

6. To create a separate district that may be used as a buffer from military land and other land uses;

7. To assure the permanent use of such areas for their primary natural function, as well as for enjoyment by the general public.

B.

Property development standards. The following land uses and property development standards shall apply to land zoned as NOS.

1.

1.

Before land owned by the city and managed and controlled by the public service board is rezoned to NOS, the city and the public service board shall enter into a joint use agreement specifying the duties and responsibilities for the maintenance of the open space and the management of the passive recreational uses permitted within the area rezoned to NOS.

2. Refer to Section 20.08 for uses permitted within the NOS zoning district. The uses specified below shall have additional restrictions:

a.

Stormwater retention ponds are permitted but shall be restricted to public facilities only and shall be built in compliance with best practices in low impact design. Additionally, the following standards shall apply:

i. Grading shall not result in excessive erosion or degrade natural drainage paths or create irreparable scarring and shall be limited to the minimum possible disturbance of terrain and natural land features that are necessary to construct the drainage infrastructure.

ii. Upon completion of the drainage infrastructure, the area surrounding the infrastructure shall be revegetated through the replanting of appropriate native, non-invasive, adaptive and drought tolerant vegetation.

iii. Road access, work areas and grading for such access shall be constructed in compliance with best practices in low impact design.

b. Campgrounds shall be restricted as follows:

i. Permitted camping units shall be restricted to tents only;

ii. Access to campsites shall be limited to walking, hiking or other non-motorized means, except that such campgrounds may contain service roads for maintenance of campground facilities.

3.

Walls. Refer to Chapter 20.16 (Screening and Fencing) for applicable standards pertaining to walls and fencing.

4.

Parking. Off-street parking surfaces shall be constructed of pervious surfaces that may include dirt or gravel. Parking shall be provided in accordance with the approved generalized or detailed site development plan.

5.

Site plan. At a minimum, approval of a generalized site plan shall be required for all proposed uses permitted in an NOS district; refer to Section 20.08 for additional site plan requirements by use. In addition to compliance with applicable requirements of this Title, the site plan shall include the following:

a. General features or concept of the proposed use;

b. Location of all impervious surfaces, structures, utilities and associated parking, as well as all areas that will be disturbed by the construction of a permitted use;

c. All areas that shall remain in their natural state;

d. For applications requiring the submittal of a detailed site development plan, only areas being improved shall require illustration of stormwater drainage elements.

6. Signs.

a. On-premises signs shall be permitted; these signs shall comply with all regulations and permitting procedures as codified in Section 20.18 (Signs).

b. Wayfinding signs including, but not limited to, trailhead kiosks, interpretive signs and trail markers may be permitted after review and approval by the city manager or designee.

7.

Wildlife sanctuary. For purposes of this section, wildlife sanctuaries shall include areas designated as such by local, state or federal documentation. If governmental documentation cannot be produced with an environmentally sensitive designation that meets the following criteria, then the city manager or designee may evaluate the property and determine if it meets one or more of the following characteristics. If the city manager or designee determines it is not an environmentally sensitive area as defined herein a special permit application may not be processed.

a. Areas with significant natural features;

b. Areas which enhance the open space and aesthetic qualities of the land;

c. Areas that protect agricultural resources;

d. Areas necessary for the preservation of natural resources;

e. Areas containing habitats for breeding, wintering, migratory, threatened, or endangered species;

f. Wetlands and wetland transition areas;

g. Aquifer recharge and discharge areas;

h. Archaeological sites;

i. Waters of the state, which includes arroyos; or

j. Other areas or features that have been designated for protection due to ecological integrity, balance or character.

8. Landscape treatments.

a. Permitted uses within this district shall not be required to conform to the landscaping requirements of Title 18 (Building and Construction) of the El Paso City Code. Landscaping, streetscape, and other green areas proposed within the development shall be shown and considered as part of the site plan approval process.

b. Impervious surfaces, structures, utilities and associated parking constructed as shown on the approved generalized site plan or other site plan, as required by Section 20.08, shall be exempt from re-vegetation requirements.

C. Incentives.

1. Applications under this section shall be expedited as follows:

a. Processing for NOS development plans not requiring city council approval: thirty days;

b. Processing for an NOS rezoning application, detailed site development plan or other application that requires city council approval: approximately sixty days (minimum) for final approval.

2. The city shall waive application fees for rezoning, detailed site development plans, and any major or minor amendment applications.

(Ord. No. 17306, § 4, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 17442, § 22, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17490, 1-25-2011; Ord. No. 18531, § 5, 6-28-2016)

20.10.390 - Reserved.

Editor's note— Ord. No. 019734, § 3, 5-28-2025, repealed § 20.10.390, which pertained to neighborhood commercial uses (SRR district) and derived from Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), adopted 2007.

20.10.400 - Neighborhood conservancy overlay.

A. Purpose. The purpose of a neighborhood conservancy overlay (NCO) is to regulate the construction, reconstruction, renovation and alteration of buildings and other structures in designated places and areas of historic, cultural, or architectural importance and significance within the city. These designated places and areas have a distinctive atmosphere or character and should be conserved through regulations that protect and enhance their significant attributes. The designation has the effect of modifying the existing development standards of the district by requiring owners of property to comply with additional reasonable design standards as part of building construction within a neighborhood. The design standards are intended to promote the conservation of the neighborhood attributes and thereby contributing to the stability or stabilization of the neighborhood. All properties within an NCO will carry the suffix "NCO," indicating that such property is subject to the design standards of both the designated zoning district and the NCO. An NCO designation shall not prohibit the use of a property that is otherwise permitted by the existing zoning.

B. Designation.

1. An application for an NCO designation may be initiated either by a property owner or group of property owners, or by the city plan commission, or by the El Paso City Council. No NCO shall be designated and approved by the El Paso City Council if owners of more than fifty-one percent of the total land area within a neighborhood described in the application object in writing to the designation. Signatures of the property owners evidencing their dissent must be submitted prior to approval by the El Paso City Council of an ordinance designating an NCO.

2. The area described in the application shall include at least one block face. For purposes of this section, a block face shall be defined as a parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways, streets, or alleys.

C.

Application. An application for an NCO designation shall be subject to the requirements and procedures of Chapter 20.04, and shall also be accompanied with all of the following:

1. A list of all neighborhood associations and/or other organizations representing the interests of the property owners in the area described in the

application;

2.

A written justification which supports the requested NCO designation. The justification must contain a detailed statement of why such a designation would be in the best interest of the city as a whole, and a description of the attributes of the area which merit conservation.

D.

Study area plan formulation and adoption. Prior to application for an NCO, the city shall have adopted a specific study area plan, as required by "The Plan for El Paso," for property within a neighborhood wholly or partially to be designated for mixed-use. The study area plan shall, at a minimum, include a written and graphic description of the concerns, policy objectives, guidelines and design standards for regulating the development of the area. The city development department shall, upon authorization and prioritization by the El Paso City Council, assist area residents and other interested parties to prepare a study area plan, and when completed shall be on file in the department. Any NCO designation approved by the city shall incorporate the study area plan by express reference.

E. City review committee.

1. A city review committee (CRC) shall be created to oversee the functions within each area designated an NCO. The CRC shall have the power and authority to review and authorize the release of building permits for any new construction, reconstruction or renovation of the exterior of existing buildings or structures within a designated NCO. The building official shall forward all applicable building permit applications to the CRC.

2. Members of the CRC shall consist of the planning official, the building official and the historic preservation officer (or their respective designees). The planning official shall act as secretary of the committee. For quorum purposes, presence of all members of the CRC shall be required to convene a meeting and vote on any permit. Meetings shall be scheduled, with notice duly posted according to the Texas Open Meetings Law, by the secretary as necessary to review and act on permit applications. Written notice of any permit application received and pending action before the CRC shall be given, as a minimum, to any area neighborhood associations and to the immediate abutting property owners within the NCO area. The notice shall state the date and time of the scheduled meeting before the CRC.

3. The secretary shall make and maintain a detailed record of all proceedings and procedures of the CRC, setting forth the reasons for each decision, the vote of each member participating therein, and any failure of a member to vote. Action taken at a CRC meeting shall require the affirmative vote of a majority of the members present at the meeting. The CRC shall, in every case, reach a decision without unreasonable delay.

4. All decisions of the CRC shall be reasonable under the circumstances and shall not be arbitrary or capricious. If the CRC has not disapproved an application for a building permit within twenty days after it has been properly submitted then such application shall be deemed to have been approved without further action of the CRC. All decisions shall be in writing and shall be served on the applicant by the United States Mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and shall be deemed given when deposited in the United States Mail.

F.

Contents of application, scope of review, waivers, and fees.

1. Prior to the issuance of any building permits for any new construction, reconstruction or renovation of the exterior of existing buildings on property (or any portion thereof) with an NCO designation, drawings and applications shall be reviewed by the CRC to determine if the proposed new construction, reconstruction or renovation complies with the design standards of the specific study area plan.

2. The CRC shall establish and publish a detailed list of the documents and information that must be submitted by an applicant together with the application for a building permit, copies of which shall be maintained as directed by the city manager or designee. All applications for building permits on property with an NCO designation shall comply with the required design standards for the applicable study area plan. Approval of a permit shall indicate that the proposed construction complies with the requirements of this section and the design standards of the specific study area plan. The CRC may request assistance of other city departments to review drawings and applications. In the event that the design standards of the applicable study area plan are more restrictive or impose higher (or different) standards than the requirements of this title, the design standards of the applicable study area plan shall govern.

3. The standard fee for an application which requires review by the city review committee (CRC) shall be as established in the annual budget resolution approved by city council.

G.

Appeals of CRC Actions. Decisions of the CRC on any building permit application may be appealed to the city plan commission within fifteen calendar days after the decision is rendered by the CRC. The applicant, or an owner of a building or structure located within the designated NCO, and aggrieved by the decision of the CRC may file an appeal. The appeal shall be filed in writing with the secretary and shall be accompanied by the fee approved by city council in the annual budget resolution and a reasonably detailed statement of which design standard is not met in the application for a building permit with sufficient evidence to warrant the appeal. Evidence may include, but is not limited to:

1. A demonstration that the intent of a design standard has been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted;

2. Relevant evidence was not considered by the CRC in making its decision;

3.

The alternate design is at least equivalent of that prescribed in terms of quality, effectiveness and aesthetics;

4.

Written notice of any appeal filed shall be given, as a minimum, to any area neighborhood associations and to the immediate abutting property owners within the NCO area. The notice shall state the date and time of the scheduled meeting before the city plan commission;

5. In exercising its powers, the city plan commission may reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or may modify the requirement, decision or determination appealed from a decision of the CRC. The city plan commission shall be authorized to impose any necessary conditions or safeguards to ensure that the purpose and intent of these regulations is satisfied. The grant of an appeal to a requirement pursuant to this section shall not be construed as a waiver of any other requirement of this section. Modifications concerning use shall never be permitted under any circumstances. Any decision of the city plan commission on an appeal as provided in this section shall be final;

6. An application for appeal shall be on forms prescribed by the planning division, and shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution or ordinance of the El Paso City Council to help defray the cost of publication and general expenses in connection with the appeal. All decisions shall be in writing and shall be served on the applicant by the United States Mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, and shall be deemed given when deposited in the United States Mail.

H. Plan Review Not Required. For purposes of this section, review and authorization to release building permit applications for the new construction, reconstruction, or renovation of the exterior of buildings within an approved NCO shall not be required for ordinary minor nonstructural repair work having a value of two thousand dollars or less.

(Ord. 16761 § 1 (part), 2007; Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17442, § 23, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17801, § 5, 6-5-2012, eff. 6-11-2012; Ord. No. 19085, §§ 1, 2, 8-18-2020)

20.10.405 - Environmental and wildlife research conservancy overlay.

A. Purpose.

1. The purpose of an Environmental and Wildlife Research Conservancy Overlay (EWRCO) is to conserve, protect, manage, restore, or enhance areas that have a distinctive environmental, cultural, natural or wildlife character or attributes through the application of regulatory standards that protect and enhance those specified character and attributes. The designation has the effect of modifying the existing land use and development standards of the base zoning district of the land within the overlay by requiring owners of property to comply with additional reasonable land use and design standards. The adopted land use and development standards are intended to contribute towards the stability or stabilization of the property while allowing compatible research, educational and recreational activity within the property.

2. Development standards such as height, setbacks, and allowed land uses shall be specified by the study area plan of the managing entity adopting the EWRCO overlay. All properties within an EWRCO will carry the suffix "EWRCO," indicating that such property is subject to the land use and design standards of the EWRCO. Any land uses specified under the underlying base zoning districts will not be allowed unless specified in the ordinance

adopting the overlay.

B. Designation.

1. An application for an EWRCO designation may be initiated either by a property owner or group of property owners. No EWRCO shall be designated and approved by the El Paso City Council unless all property owners of the total land area proposed for the overlay agree to the designation.

C.

Application. An application for an EWRCO designation shall be subject to the requirements and procedures of Chapter 20.04, and shall also be accompanied with all of the following:

1. A list of all the property owners in the area described in the application;

2.

A written justification which supports the requested EWRCO designation. The justification must contain a detailed statement of why such a designation would be in the best interest of the city as a whole, and a description of the attributes of the area which merit conservation.

D.

Study area plan formulation and adoption. Prior to approval for an EWRCO, the city shall have adopted a specific study area plan, as required by "The Plan for El Paso," for property within the proposed EWRCO. The study area plan shall, at a minimum, include a written and graphic description of the concerns, policy objectives, guidelines and design standards for regulating the development of the area. The planning and economic development department may, upon authorization of the city manager, assist the property owners and other interested parties to prepare a study area plan, and when completed shall be on file in the department. Any EWRCO designation approved by the city shall incorporate the study area plan by express reference.

E. Contents of application, scope of review, waivers.

1. Prior to the issuance of any building permits for any new construction, reconstruction or renovation of the exterior of existing buildings on property (or any portion thereof) with an EWRCO designation, drawings and applications shall be reviewed by the planning division to determine if the proposed new construction, reconstruction or renovation complies with the design standards of the specific study area plan.

2. All applications for building permits on property with an EWRCO designation shall comply with the required design standards for the applicable study area plan. Approval of a permit shall indicate that the proposed construction complies with the requirements of this section and the design standards of the specific study area plan.

(Ord. No. 17776, § 2, 5-1-2012)

20.10.410 - Off-street parking (serving another property).

A.

Any otherwise permitted use for which the off-street parking requirements of Chapter 20.14 are to be satisfied by off-street parking spaces on property which is located on a separate site from the property requiring the off-street parking spaces, and for which the following can be demonstrated:

1. The parking area is compatible with the general development of the neighborhood and does not adversely affect the use of adjacent properties;

2. The parking area is so arranged as to permit sufficient space for parking spaces and turning maneuvers, as well as adequate ingress and egress to the site;

3. Lighting shall comply with Chapter 18.18 (Dark Sky Ordinance) of this Code;

4. The parking area is located in such a manner from the site generating the parking requirement to assure that such parking facility will adequately serve the use;

5. Access to be provided to the parking area shall not be through private property that is not zoned to permit the use generating the off-street parking;

6.

Adequate provisions shall be made to assure that the parking area is reasonably identifiable as to the patronage it serves, the location, points of access, hours of operation and other appropriate matters made as a condition of the special permit approval;

7.

The parking spaces required to be provided for the use shall be restricted to that use;

8. Any off-street parking spaces to be provided on the site generating the off-street parking requirement shall be used to accommodate required handicapped accessible spaces and patron parking;

9.

The parking area shall be owned or leased by the same property owner who operates the use generating the off-street parking requirement, and any leasehold interest in the parking area shall be validly held for the duration of the use.

B.

Off-street parking spaces serving another property which are located partially or totally on a separate site from the property requiring the off-street parking spaces.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.420 - Office warehouse.

Where permitted in a zoning district, an office warehouse shall be subject to the following:

A. The facility shall include a combined use of either an office or office showroom and a warehouse for the distribution of products;

B. The office showroom component shall mean that portion of this use that provides area for the regular transaction of business and for the display of open merchandise in a finished building setting;

C. An office component of this use must comprise at least ten percent of the total floor area of the use, and an office showroom component of this use must comprise at least fifteen percent of the total floor area of the use;

D. Retail sales of products which are sold at wholesale on the premises is permitted as a part of this use.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.430 - Outdoor flea markets.

20.10.430 - Outdoor flea markets.

A.

Compliance Required. Where permitted in a district, outdoor flea markets shall comply with the following:

1. One vendor off-street parking space and one customer off-street parking space shall be provided per stall/space. Each off-street parking space shall meet the minimum requirements of Chapter 20.14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations) of this title;

2. Site area to be paved with asphalt, cement or other dust-free surface;

3.

A six-foot high wall or fence, consisting of three-feet in masonry material and three-feet in wrought iron material, shall be required around the perimeter of that portion of the site being used for the operation and use of an outdoor flea market. A waiver of this requirement may be requested pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 20.04 (Administrative Procedures) of this title;

4. Each vendor stall/space shall provide at least one covered garbage container, a minimum five-gallon garbage container shall be required for each food vendor;

5. One sanitary portable facility shall be provided for every twenty-five vendor stalls/spaces, or portion thereof, or the number of fixed sanitary facilities required by the Plumbing Code for the city based on the site area;

6. The operator shall be responsible for maintaining the site area to insure compliance with applicable portions of this Code;

on

7. A ten-foot pedestrian walkway shall be provided between each row of vendor stalls/spaces;

8. A twenty-foot fire accessway shall be provided within the site area where required by the fire chief;

9.

A minimum clear area of all sides (distance) of five feet shall be provided between a food vendor (utilizing cooking or heating facilities) stall/space and any other adjoining nonfood vendor stall/space, unless otherwise approved by the fire chief;

10.

Only natural gas or liquefied petroleum gas shall be allowed for food cooking units, unless otherwise approved by the fire chief, on a case by case inspection, other cooking appliances that meet code may be approved;

11.

A nonflammable shelter shall be required for all food cooking units;

12.

At least one 2A10BC fire extinguisher shall be required for all food cooking units;

13.

No parking or structures shall be allowed within the required setback, pedestrian walkways or fire accessway;

14.

Signage for the flea market activity shall be restricted to that allowed in the applicable zoning district;

15.

The noise levels of the flea market activity shall not exceed those specified in Chapter 9.40 of this Code. No outside amplification devices shall be permitted in conjunction with the flea market operation when the site is adjacent to any property that is used for residential purposes;

16. The operator shall be responsible for maintaining the property and abutting sidewalks, parkways and street gutters from accumulations of waste, and shall be subject to all applicable health and safety provisions of this Code.

B. Operator license. An operator license or the operation of an outdoor flea market shall be required and be subject to the requirements of Title 5 (Business taxes, licenses and regulations), of this Code. Application for a license shall be made pursuant to the requirements of Title 5.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17442, § 24, 10-26-2010)

20.10.440 - Pasturage.

Where permitted in a district, pasturage of horses, cattle, goats and sheep, including breeding, must additionally comply with Title 7 of this Code.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.450 - Personal care facilities.

Personal care facilities operated in a residential zoning district shall comply with the following:

1. Be licensed in accordance with state and/or city regulations;

2. Permitted signs shall be limited to a one square foot nameplate attached to and not projecting more than one inch beyond the face of the building. The nameplate shall contain only the name and occupation of the provider;

3. The exterior of the building or grounds shall not be altered, decorated or painted in any way to distract from the residential character of the neighborhood;

4. A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided for every two bedrooms or portion thereof, and for every two employees or portion

thereof.

(Ord. 16817 § 6, 2008; Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17577, § 8, 7-7-2011)

20.10.455 - Personal wireless service facilities.

A. All PWSF permitted in accordance with this chapter, may be constructed within the corporate limits of the city and shall be constructed and operated in accordance with industry standards and subject to the restrictions and limitations set forth in this chapter and in the adopted PWSF policy guide. The director of planning and inspections department, or other person designated by the city manager, is authorized to adopt and amend the PWSF policy guide to provide clarifications to requirements established under this title regarding the placement and construction of PWSFs. The policy guide shall control the interpretation of the provisions of this title regarding the placement and construction of PWSFs over any other interpretation. The director shall make the PWSF policy guide available to the public.

B. Certification. All owners of PWSF currently in existence as of the date of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall certify in writing, no later than thirty days after the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to the building official that the PWSF in existence are not a safety hazard to the public, and are in operable condition, as well as provide an address of the location of each PWSF and any other pertinent information, excluding proprietary information, required on the form prescribed by the development services department.

Thereafter, for all such PWSF and additionally for all new PWSF installed and constructed after the date of passage by the ordinance codified and permitted in accordance with this chapter, the owner shall certify in writing, annually no later than January 31, beginning in 2008, to the building official that the PWSF in existence are not a safety hazard to the public, and are in operable condition, as well as provide an address of the location of the PWSF, and any other pertinent information, excluding proprietary information, required on the form prescribed by the building official.

The person who constructed the PWSF, the person who operated the PWSF or the owner of record must notify the zoning administrator of any change in the information or status of the PWSF as stated in the certification within thirty days after such change.

C. Removal. For any PWSF constructed after the date of this chapter, if the PWSF is not used to transmit, receive or relay voice and data signals to or from wireless communication devices for a period of six months, then the owner of record must notify the building official and apply for a permit to remove the structure. All PWSF towers and antennas shall be restored to service or removed by the person who constructed the facility, by the person who operated the facility or by the property owner within eighteen months from the time the PWSF ceased being used to transmit, receive or relay voice and data signals to or from wireless communication devices.

If the use of the PWSF has not been restored within an eighteen-month period from the time the PWSF have ceased being used to transmit, receive or relay voice and data signals to or from wireless communication devices, the PWSF must be removed and the PWSF site restored to its original or better condition, at the property owner's expense.

For any PWSF in existence but not listed as operable on the certification form as of the date of the passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the owner shall have eighteen months from the date of certification in which the PWSF must be made operable. If the PWSF is not operable within eighteen months, then the owner of record must notify the building official and apply for a permit to remove the structure. All PWSF towers and antennas shall be removed by the person who constructed the facility, by the person who operated the facility or by the property owner within six months after the aforementioned time period expires. The PWSF site must be restored to its original or better condition, at the property owner's expense.

D. Proposed PWSF Facility Site Location and Zoning District Location Hierarchy Preferences.

1. The following list indicates the city's preferences for facility site locations, in descending order of preference. Subject to all other requirements of the El Paso City Code and provided the City Code allows for such location, applicants are not prohibited from applying for any type of facility site location listed below. If applicant is seeking a permit for a facility site location listed under Sections 20.10.455(D)(1)(a)(ii) to 20.10.455(D)(1)(e) below, then the applicant will submit with the application a due diligence analysis. At a minimum, the due diligence analysis must contain the following: a map showing all facility site locations considered within five hundred feet of the proposed location that are higher on the preference list and a narrative explaining why the other facility site locations higher on the preference list are not feasible. City staff shall accept a due diligence analysis for facility site locations if such complies with the requirements above. Applications submitted by an applicant must still comply with all other requirements under the El Paso City Code. The following is the list of facility site location preferences:

a. Antennae co-location on existing camouflaged PWSF:

i. Facility;

ii. Roof;

iii. Ground-mounted;

b. Antennae co-location on existing PWSF:

i. Facility;

ii. Roof;

iii. Ground-mounted;

c.

New facility-mounted PWSF, meeting applicable camouflaging and screening requirements;

d. New roof-mounted PWSF, meeting applicable camouflaging and screening requirements;

e.

New ground-mounted PWSF, meeting applicable camouflaging and screening requirements.

2. The following list indicates the city's preferences for zoning district locations, in descending order of preference. Subject to all other requirements of the El Paso City Code and provided the City Code allows for such location, applicants are not prohibited from applying to locate any facility in any zoning district location listed below. If applicant is seeking a permit to locate a facility on a zoning district listed under Sections 20.10.455(D)(2)(b) to 20.10.455(D)(2)(c) below, then the applicant will submit with the application a due diligence analysis. At a minimum, the due diligence analysis must contain the following: a map showing all zoning districts considered within five hundred feet of the proposed location that are higher on the preference list and a narrative explaining why the other zoning district locations higher on the preference list are not feasible. City staff shall accept a due diligence analysis for zoning district locations if such complies with the requirements above. Applications submitted by an applicant must still comply with all other requirements under the El Paso City Code. The following is the list of zoning district location preferences:

a.

Heavy commercial and manufacturing zoning districts.

b. Light commercial and special purpose zoning districts.

c. Residential and apartment zoning districts.

E. PWSF located in the NOS zoning district is prohibited.

F. All PWSF shall comply with the requirements under this subsection listed on the PWSF Table below. Meeting the special permit requirements under this subsection and PWSF Table is not a guarantee of approval of a special permit. All special permit applications must meet the requirements of Chapter 20.04 (Administrative Provisions), Article V (Special Permit Approval Process) of the El Paso City Code. The requirements for all PWSF are as listed in the following PWSF Table:

A. Residential and B. C-1, C-2, P-C and C- C. C-3, C-4 and C-5 D. M-1, M-2, M-3, P-I, & Apartment Districts OP Commercial Commercial Districts Q (Manufacturing, (including RF, SRR, PR-I, Districts, S-D Special Industrial and Quarry PR-II, & PMD) Development, and Districts) Special Purpose Districts (excluding RF, SRR, PR-I, PR-II, PMD, and P-I)

0.0 Zoning Districts

1.0 Ground Mounted PWSF

1.1 Permitted Special Permit Required Permitted by right in C-1 Permitted by right. Permitted by right. and C-2 zoning districts Special Permit approval Special Permit approval only. Special Permit required if exceptions required if exceptions or approval required in all or modifications are modifications are other zoning districts in requested requested Section F.0.0.B. Special permit approval required also if exceptions or modifications are requested, or unless otherwise indicated.

1.2

Setbacks

3' from any abutting

3' from any abutting

1' from any abutting

1' from any abutting

property line for every 1' of structure height abutting Residential and Apartment zoning districts (including RF, SRR, PR-I, PR-II, & PMD); 2' from any property line for every 1' of structure height abutting Residential and Apartment zoning districts (including RF, SRR, PR-I, PR-II, & PMD) for facilities camouflaged as a Low Visibility Facility only; 1' from any abutting property line for every 1' of tower height abutting all other zoning districts in Section F.0.0.B, Section F.0.0.C., and Section F.0.0.D. For a property line that abuts right-of-way. The base zoning setback standard applies provided however that if the right-of-way separates the property from a Residential or Apartment zoning district (including RF, SRR, PR-1, PR-II, & PMD), the following minimum property line for every property line for every 1' of structure height 1' of tower height abutting Residential and abutting Residential and Apartment zoning Apartment zoning districts (including RF, districts (including RF, SRR, PR-I, PR-II, & PMD); SRR, PR-I, PR-II, & PMD); 2' from any property All other zoning districts line for every 1' of in Section F.0.0.B, structure height Section F.0.0.C., and abutting Residential and Section F.0.0.D. subject Apartment zoning to base zoning setback districts (including RF, standards. SRR, PR-I, PR-II, & PMD) for facilities For a property line that camouflaged as a Low is abutting right-of-way, Visibility Facility only; the base zoning setback standard applies 1' from any abutting provided however that property line for every if right-of-way separates 1' of tower height the property from a abutting all other zoning Residential or districts in Section Apartment zoning F.0.0.B, Section F.0.0.C., district (including RF, and Section F.0.0.D. SRR, PR-1, PR-II, & PMD), a minimum 1' setback For a property line that for every 1' of tower abuts right-of-way. The height must be base zoning setback maintained from the standard applies base of the antenna provided however that support structure to the if the right-of-way property line of the separates the property Residential or from a Residential or Apartment zoning Apartment zoning district (including RF, district (including RF, SRR, PR-1, PR-II, & PMD) SRR, PR-1, PR-II, & PMD), across the right-of-way. the following minimum Applicant may include property line for every 1' of tower height abutting Residential and Apartment zoning districts (including RF, SRR, PR-I, PR-II, & PMD); All other zoning districts in Section F.0.0.B, Section F.0.0.C., and Section F.0.0.D. subject to base zoning setback standards. For a property line that is abutting right-of-way, the base zoning setback standard applies provided however that if right-of-way separates the property from a Residential or Apartment zoning district (including RF, SRR, PR-1, PR-II, & PMD), a minimum 1' setback for every 1' of tower height must be maintained from the base of the antenna support structure to the property line of the Residential or Apartment zoning district (including RF, SRR, PR-1, PR-II, & PMD) across the right-of-way. Applicant may include

setbacks must be

setbacks must be

the width of the right-

the width of the right-of-

maintained measured

maintained measured

of-way in the setback

way in the setback

from the base of the

from the base of the

measurement in

measurement in

antenna support

antenna support

accordance to Section

accordance to Section

structure to the

structure to the

F.1.2.1 below.

F.1.2.1 below.

property line of the

property line of the

Residential or

Residential or

Apartment zoning

Apartment zoning

district (including RF,

district (including RF,

SRR, PR-1, PR-II, & PMD)

SRR, PR-1, PR-II, & PMD)

across the right-of-way:

across the right-of-way:

3' setback for every 1' of tower height for facilities that are not camouflaged as a Low Visibility Facility. The width of the right-of- way may be included in the setback measurement in accordance to Section F.1.2.1 below; 2' setback for every 1' of tower height for facilities camouflaged as a Low Visibility Facility. The width of the right- of-way may be included in the setback measurement in accordance to Section F.1.2.1 below. For a property line that abuts right-of-way. The base zoning setback standard applies provided however that if the right-of-way separates the property from any zoning district other than a Residential or Apartment zoning district (including RF, SRR, PR-1, PR-II, & PMD), then a minimum 1' setback for every 1' of tower height must be 3' setback for every 1' of tower height for facilities that are not camouflaged as a Low Visibility Facility. The width of the right-of- way may be included in the setback measurement in accordance to Section F.1.2.1 below; 2' setback for every 1' of tower height for facilities camouflaged as a Low Visibility Facility. The width of the right- of-way may be included in the setback measurement in accordance to Section F.1.2.1 below. For a property line that abuts right-of-way. The base zoning setback standard applies provided however that if the right-of-way separates the property from any zoning district other than a Residential or Apartment zoning district (including RF, SRR, PR-1, PR-II, & PMD), then a minimum 1' setback for every 1' of tower height must be

maintained measured

maintained measured

from the base of the

from the base of the

antenna support

antenna support

structure to the

structure to the

property line of the

property line of the

zoning district across

zoning district across

the right-of-way. The

the right-of-way. The

width of the right-of-

width of the right-of-

way may be included in

way may be included in

the setback

the setback

measurement in

measurement in

accordance to Section

accordance to Section

1.2.1 Additional Setback Standards for Ground Mounted PWSF 1.3 Reductions in minimum setback requirements 1.3.1 Additional F.1.2.1 below. F.1.2.1 below. If abutting ROW or easement, the width of the ROW or easement may [be] included in the setback measurement For facilities that abut For facilities that abut N/A N/A Residential and Residential and Apartment zoning Apartment zoning districts (including RF, districts (including RF, SRR, PR-I, PR-II, & PMD) SRR, PR-I, PR-II, & PMD) and that are and that are camouflaged as a Low camouflaged as a Low Visibility Facility, Visibility Facility, setbacks may be setbacks may be reduced with a special reduced with a special permit provided that permit provided that setback may not be setback may not be reduced below 1' from reduced below 1' from any abutting property any abutting property line for every 1' of tower line for every 1' of tower height (see Section height (see Section F.1.3.1 below) F.1.3.1 below) Modifications to Required Setbacks must meet the following criteria:

Standards for

Special Permits

i. The property on which the PWSF antenna support structure is to be located is the only property

Applicable to

reasonably available for use by the applicant that will enable the applicant to reasonably serve the area

Reductions in

designated in a manner that is technically feasible and commercially reasonable;

required

minimum

ii. The applicant is unable to collocate its antennas on an existing PWSF antenna support structure that

setbacks for

is used by a third person or entity and located such that the applicant is able to reasonably serve the

Ground Mounted

area designated in a manner that is technically feasible and commercially reasonable;

PWSF

iii. The applicant cannot use another PWSF antenna support structure that is located such that the

applicant is able to reasonable serve the area designated in a manner that is technically feasible and

commercially reasonable or that the other PWSF antenna support structures used by the applicant will

not safely support additional antennas; and

iv. Facility is camouflaged as a Low Visibility Facility.

1.4 Minimum separation

One-half mile

One-half mile

2,000'

2,000'

1,760

(measured base of

'

existing to base of

proposed)

1.5 Reductions in minimum separation requirements for Ground Mounted PWSF 1.5.1 Additional Standards for Special Permits Applicable to Reductions in required minimum separation for Ground Mounted PWSF Minimum separation Minimum separation Minimum separation Minimum separation may be reduced for may be reduced for may be reduced for may be reduced for facilities camouflaged as facilities camouflaged as facilities camouflaged as a Low Visibility Facility a Low Visibility Facility a Low Visibility Facility a Low Visibility Facility only with a special only with a special only with a special only with a special permit, but not below permit, but not below permit (see Section permit (see Section 2,000' (see Section 1,760' (see Section F.1.5.1) F.1.5.1) F.1.5.1) F.1.5.1) Modifications to Required Minimum Separation must meet the following criteria: i. The applicant is reasonably unable to use property that meets the minimum separation distance in Section F.1.4 from another PWSF antenna support structure and be able to reasonably serve the area designated in a manner that is technically feasible and commercially reasonable; ii. The property on which the PWSF antenna support structure is to be located is the only reasonably available property for use within the minimum separation distance in Section F.1.4 of another PWSF antenna support structure that will enable the applicant to reasonably serve the area designated in a manner that is technically feasible and commercially reasonable; iii. The area designated by the applicant cannot be reasonably served in a manner that is technically feasible and commercially reasonable by locating additional antennas on the applicant's existing PWSF antenna support structures because such existing PWSF antenna support structures cannot safely support additional antennas; iv. The applicant is unable to collocate its antennas on an existing PWSF antenna support structure that serve the area designated in a manner that is technically feasible and commercially reasonable; v. The applicant shall submit a list of addresses/locations showing all existing PWSF within the radius of the minimum separation distance in Section F.1.4 of the proposed site and a map depicting such locations with the special permit application; and vi. Facility is camouflaged as a Low Visibility Facility.

facilities camouflaged as

is owned or operated by a third person or entity and located such that the applicant is able to reasonably

1.6 Maximum Height Permitted (measured to top of steel) 1.7 Allowable Increases in Maximum Height Permitted 35' C-1 and C-2 zoning 60' 60' districts only: 35'. For all other zoning districts in Section F.0.0.B, height shall be limited to 45'. N/A C-1 and C-2 zoning N/A N/A districts only: Height shall be permitted up to 45' if facility is camouflaged as a Low Visibility Facility.

1.8 Special Permit for Additional Height Height shall be permitted up to 45' with a special permit provided the applicant meets the requirements of Section F.1.8.1.A.1 below. Height shall be permitted up to 60' with a special permit provided the applicant meets the requirements of Section F.1.8.1.A.2 below. C-1 and C-2 zoning Height shall be districts only: Height permitted up to 75' with shall be permitted up to a special permit 60' with a special permit provided applicant provided the applicant meets the requirements meets the requirements of Section F.1.8.1.C.1 of Section F.1.8.1.B.1 below. below. Height shall be permitted up to 90' with a special permit provided the applicant meets the requirements of Section F.1.8.1.C.2 below. Height shall be permitted up to 75' with a special permit provided applicant meets the requirements of Section F.1.8.1.D.1 below. Height shall be permitted up to 90' with a special permit provided the applicant meets the requirements of Section F.1.8.1.D.2 below.

1.8.1 Additional Standards for Special Permits for Additional Height for Ground Mounted PWSF A. Residential and Apartment zoning districts (including RF, SRR, PR-I, PR-II, & PMD). 1. Must meet the following criteria for height to be permitted up to 45': i. Facility is camouflaged as a Low Visibility Facility. 2. Must meet the following criteria for height to be permitted up to 60': i. Facility is camouflaged as a Low Visibility Facility; and ii. Located on a property whose principal use is a church, school, or other permitted non- residential use. B. C-1 and C-2 zoning C. C-3, C-4 and C-5 districts only. Commercial Districts. 1. Must meet the 1. Must meet the following criteria for following criteria for height to be permitted height to be permitted up to 60': up to 75': i. Facility is i. Facility has been camouflaged as a Low designed and Visibility Facility. structurally engineered to accommodate for colocation of a second carrier or agency; and ii. If facility is proposed within 500' of a Residential or Apartment zoning district (including RF, SRR, PR-I, PR-II, & PMD), facility must be camouflaged as a Low Visibility Facility. 2. Must meet the following criteria for height to be permitted up to 90': i. Facility has been designed and structurally engineered to accommodate for colocation of two additional carriers or agencies for a total of Q (Manufacturing, Districts) 1. Must meet the up to 75': designed and ii. If facility is a Residential or Apartment zoning facility must be Visibility Facility. 2. Must meet the up to 90': designed and colocation of two

D. M-1, M-2, M-3, P-I, &

Industrial and Quarry

following criteria for

height to be permitted

i. Facility has been

structurally engineered

to accommodate for

colocation of a second

carrier or agency; and

proposed within 500' of

district (including RF,

SRR, PR-I, PR-II, & PMD),

camouflaged as a Low

following criteria for

height to be permitted

i. Facility has been

structurally engineered

to accommodate for

three carriers or

additional carriers or

agencies;

agencies for a total of

three carriers or

ii. Facility is

agencies;

camouflaged as a Low

Visibility Facility;

ii. Facility is

camouflaged as a Low

iii. The property on

Visibility Facility;

which the PWSF

antenna support

iii. The property on

structure is to be

which the PWSF

located is the only

antenna support

property reasonably

structure is to be

available for use by the applicant for a PWSF antenna support structure of the height being proposed by the applicant that will enable the applicant to reasonably serve the area designated in a manner that is technically feasible and commercially reasonable; iv. The applicant is unable to collocate its antennas on an existing PWSF antenna support structure that is owned or operated by a third person or entity and located such that the applicant is able to reasonably serve the area designated in a manner that is technically feasible and commercially reasonable; v. The applicant cannot use another PWSF antenna support structure that is located such that will enable the applicant to reasonably serve the area designated in a manner located is the only property reasonably applicant for a PWSF antenna support applicant that will area designated in a manner that is commercially reasonable; iv. The applicant is person or entity and applicant is able to area designated in a manner that is commercially reasonable; v. The applicant cannot use another

available for use by the

structure of the height

being proposed by the

enable the applicant to

reasonably serve the

technically feasible and

unable to collocate its

antennas on an existing

PWSF antenna support

structure that is owned

or operated by a third

located such that the

reasonably serve the

technically feasible and

PWSF antenna support

structure that is located

such that will enable the

applicant to reasonably

that is technically

serve the area

feasible and

designated in a manner

commercially

that is technically

reasonable or that the

feasible and

other PWSF antenna

commercially

support structures used

reasonable or that the

by the applicant will not

other PWSF antenna

safely support

support structures used

additional antennas;

by the applicant will not

and

safely support

additional antennas;

vi. Due to topographical conditions, the proposed height of the PWSF antenna support structure is reasonably necessary to enable the applicant to reasonably serve the area designated in a manner that is technically feasible and commercially reasonable. and vi. Due to topographical conditions, the proposed height of the PWSF antenna support structure is reasonably necessary to enable the applicant to reasonably serve the area designated in a manner that is technically feasible and commercially reasonable.

1.9 Camouflage and

Screening

1.10 Screening Fence

i. All ground-mounted PWSF shall be camouflaged. Camouflaging is a method of disguising or concealing

the appearance of an object by changing its usual color, modifying its shape, or locating it in a structure that complements the natural setting, existing and surrounding structures. Color cannot be the used as the only method of camouflaging. In the context of this section, camouflaging includes, but is not limited to, making PWSF antenna support structures resemble manmade trees, locating PWSF antenna support structures in bell steeples or clock towers, or on similar alternative-design mounting structures. ii. All ground-mounted PWSF shall be located to blend in with surrounding area and located in areas where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings, and other structures provide the greatest amount of screening, and sited so as to not stand out of the landscape as a wireless telecommunications facility. Considerations such as architectural designs, adjacent land uses, scale, color, and texture should be reviewed to make facility as compatible as possible to the surrounding area, including views from public areas as well as from private residences. A visual analysis, which may include renderings, photos, and design mockups, shall be submitted showing the proposed facility from adjacent properties, nearby residences, and public rights-of-way (at least one from 1,000 feet away on nearby roadways) to assess the visual impact. The applicant will need to demonstrate how the proposed camouflaging blends in with the surrounding area and why the design is compatible. Multiple design options may need to be submitted to ensure other options have been explored. Staff shall review the visual analysis to ensure a compatible design has been submitted and provide comments if the design is not appropriate for the area.

iii. All ground-mounted PWSF will be categorized as High Visibility and Low Visibility based on the context of the proposed facility. High Visibility facilities shall include designs such as man-made trees and are encouraged for existing open space or parkland areas where they may blend more easily. A "Low Visibility Facility" is a facility that is designed and constructed in a manner in which (1) the antennas, cables, and fixtures are completely enclosed so that such antennas, cables, and fixtures are not visible from any angle, (2) the facility resembles the material, color, and texture of buildings or structures located within the subject property and, (3) the facility serves or performs a function that is associated with the current use of the subject property. Without limiting the types of designs, the following are examples of Low Visibility Facilities: a bell steeple located on a church property, a clock tower on a school campus, a flag pole (with flag) on a government building, windmill on a rural district lot, or an operational light pole on a parking lot. The Zoning Administrator is the person responsible for determining whether a proposed facility meets the criteria to be classified as a Low Visibility Facility.

iv. Metallic surfaces shall be painted to reduce glare and reflections. No exterior paint colors shall be used which have a light reflecting value (LRV) greater than forty percent. The LRV of a paint is available from paint manufacturers and it measures the amount of light reflected by a certain color.

v. Screening of antennas on PWSF antenna support structures may include the use of existing parapets, walls, or similar architectural elements provided that it is painted and texturized to integrate with the architecture of the surrounding structure.

vi. Landscaping shall comply with all code requirements for landscaping.

A six-foot high screening wall or fence of other than chain-link shall be constructed around the base of a

PWSF antenna support structure to provide for security. The gate which provides access to the PWSF

antenna support structure shall remain locked at all times except when being used for access by

maintenance personnel.

1.11 Access Driveway 1.12 Increase in Elevation on Existing Ground Mounted PWSF Antenna Support Structure 1.13 Other Requirements Applicable to Ground Mounted PWSF The access driveway and off-street parking space for use by maintenance vehicles shall be paved as approved by the building official. An increase in elevation, not to exceed height found in Section F.1.6 and Section F.1.7 plus allowed modifications and Section F.1.8 above, of an existing permitted PWSF antenna support structure may be permitted only to allow for collocation of additional antennas, unless otherwise permitted by FCC provisions of Section 6409(a) and Section 332(c)(7). A structural recertification report prepared and sealed by a licensed professional engineer shall be required, and such report shall be reviewed and approved by the building official prior to issuance of a building permit. The following must accompany a request for a special permit or building permit: i. All towers located within two hundred feet of a recognized federal, state or local historic district are subject to review and approval by the Historic Preservation Officer. ii. A detailed site development plan showing the PWSF antenna support structure, antennas, and equipment in relation to the existing surroundings including screening, fencing, camouflage, off-street parking, and access from the PWSF antenna support structure to the nearest public street; iii. Evidence of satisfactory completion of a certification of compliance for personal wireless service providers issued by the public safety technology office prior to actual use of the proposed facility, such certification to include a verification letter that all required Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and Federal Communications Commission (FCC) approvals have been requested and that site-specific structural engineering and nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) reports are available on request from the applicant; and iv. The design of related support structures for new PWSF antenna support structures and appurtenant equipment storage facilities shall incorporate materials, colors, textures, screening, or camouflaging techniques that will blend them to the extent reasonably possible into the natural setting, existing and surrounding structures. The applicant will be required to provide photographs of predevelopment views versus post-development illustrations, at ninety-degree angles for a full three hundred sixty-degree radius, shown to scale. The building official shall review and consider any of the five items above to

mitigate negative visual impacts created by the proposed PWSF antenna support structure and may

require reasonable revisions necessary to bring the application into compliance with one or more of the

five items above.

1.14 Collocation or

Permitted as per FCC provisions of Section 6409(a) and Section 332(c)(7). A structural recertification

installation of additional

|

report prepared and sealed by a licensed professional engineer shall be required, and such report shall

antennas

be reviewed and approved by the building official prior to issuance of a building permit.

1.15 Existing non-conforming

ground-mounted PWSF

| |

An existing ground-mounted PWSF shall be allowed to be modified under the FCC provisions of Section

6409(a) and Section 332(c)(7). All non-conforming ground-mounted PWSFs may continue in existence as

a nonconforming structure and are allowed to be modified or rebuilt on the same property as permitted

in Section 20.22.100.

2.0 Roof-Mounted PWSF

2.1

Permitted

Only on residential

structures consisting of

five or more units or on

nonresidential

structures

Only on Commercial or

Mixed Use structures or

those residential

structures consisting of

five or more units

Only on Commercial or

Mixed Use structures or

those residential

structures consisting of

five or more units

Only on Commercial or Mixed Use structures or those residential structures consisting of five or more units

2.2 Maximum Height

15' in height above the existing roofline

Permitted (measured to

top of steel or antennae, whichever is greater) 2.3 Allowable Increases in Maximum Height Permitted 2.3.1 Additional Standards Applicable to permitted increases in Height for Roof- mounted PWSF N/A Up to 15' above the Up to 15' above the Up to 15' above the Maximum Height Maximum Height Maximum Height Permitted in Section Permitted in Section Permitted in Section F.2.2 above allowed by F.2.2 above allowed by F.2.2 above allowed by approval of a Special approval of a Special approval of a Special Permit (see Section Permit (see Section Permit (see Section F.2.3.1 below) F.2.3.1 below) F.2.3.1 below) i. The property on which the PWSF antenna support structure is to be located is the only property reasonably available for use by the applicant for a PWSF antenna support structure of the height being proposed by the applicant that will enable the applicant to reasonably serve the area designated in a manner that is technically feasible and commercially reasonable; ii. The applicant is unable to collocate its antennas on an existing PWSF antenna support structure that is owned or operated by a third person or entity and located such that the applicant is able to reasonably serve the area designated in a manner that is technically feasible and commercially reasonable; iii. The applicant cannot use the roof on the same structure on which it is located such that will enable the applicant to reasonably serve the area designated in a manner that is technically feasible and commercially reasonable or that the other PWSF antenna support structures used by the applicant will not safely support additional antennas; and iv. Due to topographical conditions, the proposed height of the PWSF antenna support structure is reasonably necessary to enable the applicant to reasonably serve the area designated in a manner that is technically feasible and commercially reasonable.

2.4 Camouflage and Screening 2.5 Other Requirements 2.6 Collocation i. Camouflaging is a method of disguising or concealing the appearance of an object by changing its usual color, modifying its shape, or locating it in a structure that complements the natural setting, existing and surrounding structures. In the context of this section, camouflaging includes, but is not limited to, making PWSF antenna support structures resemble man-made trees, locating PWSF antenna support structures such as in bell steeples or clock towers, or on similar alternative-design mounting structures. ii. Metallic surfaces shall be painted to reduce glare and reflections. No exterior paint colors shall be used which have a light reflecting value (LRV) greater than forty percent. The LRV of a paint is available from paint manufacturers and it measures the amount of light reflected by a certain color. iii. Screening of antennas on roof-mounted PWSF antenna support structures may include the use of existing parapets, walls, or similar architectural elements provided that it is painted and texturized to integrate with the architecture of the surrounding structure. Screening is not required when the height of the roofline exceeds thirty-five feet. Screening may be waived by the building official on buildings where the height of the roofline is thirty-five feet or less based on evidence provided by the applicant that the roof cannot structurally support the screen. The following must accompany a request for a special permit or building permit: i. A detailed site development plan showing the PWSF antenna support structure, antennas, and equipment in relation to the existing surroundings including screening, fencing, camouflage, off-street parking, and access from the PWSF antenna support structure to the nearest public street; ii. Evidence of satisfactory completion of a certification of compliance for personal wireless service providers issued by the public safety technology office prior to actual use of the proposed facility, such certification to include a verification letter that all required Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and Federal Communications Commission (FCC) approvals have been requested and that site-specific structural engineering and nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) reports are available on request from the applicant; and iii. Satisfactory completion of a certification of compliance for personal wireless service providers issued by the public safety technology office prior to actual use of the proposed facility, such certification to include a verification letter that all required FAA and FCC approvals have been requested and that site- specific structural and the roof and a nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) reports are available on request from the applicant. Collocation or installation of additional antennas on an existing PWSF antenna support structure is permitted. A structural recertification report for both the structure and the roof, prepared and sealed by

Collocation or installation of additional antennas on an existing PWSF antenna support structure is permitted. A structural recertification report for both the structure and the roof, prepared and sealed by a licensed professional engineer, shall be required, and such report shall be reviewed and approved by the building official prior to issuance of a building permit.

30

3.0 Facility-mounted PWSF

3.1 Permitted 3.2 Maximum Height Permitted (measured to top of steel or antennae, whichever is greater) Must be attached to a structure used for something other than a PWSF antenna support structure Limited to maximum height permitted in base zoning district in which the facility is located as indicated in Appendix B, Density and Dimensional Standards of Title 20

3.3 Allowable increases in As per Section 20.12.030.C, 15 additional feet on an existing facility to accommodate collocation of Maximum Permitted additional antennas Height 3.4 Camouflage and i. Camouflaging is a method of disguising or concealing the appearance of an object by changing its usual Screening color, modifying its shape, or locating it in a structure that complements the natural setting, existing and surrounding structures. In the context of this section, camouflaging includes, but is not limited to, making PWSF antenna support structures resemble man-made trees, locating PWSF antenna support structures such as in bell steeples or clock towers, or on similar alternative-design mounting structures. Facility-mounted PWSF shall be painted to integrate and blend with the facility-structure. ii. Metallic surfaces shall be painted to reduce glare and reflections. No exterior paint colors shall be used which have a light reflecting value (LRV) greater than forty percent. The LRV of a paint is available from paint manufacturers and it measures the amount of light reflected by a certain color. ii. Screening of antennas on facility-mounted PWSF antenna support structures may include the use of existing parapets, walls, or similar architectural elements provided that it is painted and texturized to integrate with the architecture of the surrounding structure. Screening is not required when the height of the roofline exceeds thirty-five feet. Screening may be waived by the building official on buildings where the height of the roofline is thirty-five feet or less based on evidence provided by the applicant that the roof cannot structurally support the screen. 3.5 Other Requirements The following must accompany a request for a building permit: i. A detailed plan showing the facility structure, antenna structures and equipment in relation to the existing surroundings, including screening, fencing, camouflage, off-street parking and access from the facility structures site to the nearest public street; ii. Satisfactory completion of a certification of compliance for personal wireless service providers issued by the public safety technology office prior to actual use of the proposed facility accompanied by a verification letter that all required Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and Federal Communications Commission (FCC) approvals have been requested and that site-specific structural engineering and nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) reports are available on request from the applicant; and iii. The applicant shall provide documentation to the building official that the applicant has the permission from the structure owner to install the antenna(s) on the structure. 3.6 Collocation Collocation of additional PWSF antennas on an existing facility structure is permitted. A structural

recertification report prepared and sealed by a licensed professional engineer shall be required, and such report shall be reviewed and approved by the building official prior to issuance of a building permit.

(Ord. 16826 § 1, 2008; Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. No. 17235, § 3, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. 17306, § 4, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 17442, § 25, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 19016, §§ 3—7(Exh. B), 1-7-2020; Ord. No. 19059, §§ 2, 3(Att. B), 5-12-2020)

20.10.460 - Pet shops.

Pet shops for retail sale of animals, including grooming services, must comply with Title 7 of this Code, and any workrooms and cages shall be maintained within a completely enclosed, soundproof building and that such shop be operated in a manner so as to produce no objectionable noise or odors.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.470 - Planned residential development.

A. A planned residential development shall occupy at least the minimum site area established in the district regulations. City council may approve a special permit for a planned residential development with general lot sizes and setbacks below the minimum of the underlying zoning district. The proposed development shall additionally meet the following requirements necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare of the community and in order to foster the attractiveness of a residential development and its surrounding neighborhoods:

1. Evaluation Criteria.

a. Proposed buildings shall be sited harmoniously to the terrain and to other buildings in the vicinity that have a visual relationship to the proposed buildings. For purposes of this subsection, harmoniously shall not be deemed to require that the same architecture or same type of building materials be uniformly used.

b. With respect to vehicular and pedestrian circulation and parking, special attention shall be given to the location and number of access points to public streets, width of interior drives and access points, relationship of vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and the arrangement of parking areas that are safe and convenient.

2. General Requirements.

a. Private streets and gates shall be permitted within a planned residential development and shall conform to the design standards enumerated in Title 19 (Subdivisions) of this Code.

b. The minimum site area for a planned residential development shall be one acre, within which only residential uses of the base-zoning district shall be permitted. Extensions to a planned residential development from a common boundary shall be permitted in increments of less than one acre, provided that the owners of at least seventy-five percent of the land within the original planned residential development are in agreement and are included as joint applicants to the request for special permit.

c. The minimum area requirement of the base-zoning district may be reduced by no more than twenty-five percent for lots within a planned residential development, provided, however, that the maximum density permitted by the base-zoning district shall apply in all cases except as otherwise approved by any applicable special permit granted pursuant to Chapter 20.04 (Administrative Provisions).

d.

The setback requirements of the base-zoning district shall not apply to a planned residential development, except as follows:

i. The distance between buildings shall be a minimum of ten feet except as otherwise permitted in this title;

ii. The length of the driveway shall not be less than twenty feet as measured from the face of the garage or carport to the dwelling side of the sidewalk, or to the property line where there is no sidewalk.

e. The perimeter of the planned residential development shall be designed to insure compatibility with adjacent existing or potential development by provision of compatible uses and structures.

f. No building shall exceed the height requirements of the base-zoning district.

g.

Consideration in the site plan review and evaluation process shall include the following:

i. The nature and character of the development and adequacy of the buffer between proposed improvements on the site and adjacent property;

ii. The adequacy of utilities, access, drainage and other necessary supporting facilities that have been or will be provided;

iii.

The adequacy of the design, location and arrangement of driveways and parking spaces so as to provide for the safe and convenient movement of vehicular and pedestrian traffic without adversely affecting the general public or adjacent developments.

h.

A planned residential development shall be an architecturally integrated subdivision, whether unified by similar use and density, design, building materials, or open space and streetscape elements.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.480 - Poultry hatchery.

Hatching, raising and marketing of poultry must comply with Title 7 of this Code, and are subject to the following requirements:

A. In a Ranch-Farm District - no building pertaining to this use shall be closer than fifty feet from the nearest adjoining property line;

B. In an R-1 (Residential) District - no building pertaining to this use shall be closer than one hundred feet from the nearest adjoining property line. A minimum lot size of forty thousand square feet shall be required.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.490 - Processing facilities.

A. Light Processing Facilities. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briqueting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source- separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials. Where permitted in a district, by special permit, light processing facilities shall comply with the following standards:

1. Facility does not abut a bridge or overpass;

2. Light processors will operate in an enclosed building except for incidental storage, or:

a. Shall be located within an area enclosed on all sides by a screening fence or wall not less than six feet in height and landscaped on all street

frontages, and

b. Located at least one hundred fifty feet from the property lines of an existing residential use or existing R, A, PR, SRR, RMU, PMD or NOS zoning district;

3.

A light processing facility shall be no larger than forty-five thousand square feet and may not shred, compact or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers;

4.

A light processing facility may accept used motor oil for recycling from the generator in accordance with federal, state and local regulations;

5.

Setbacks and landscaping requirements shall be as provided for in the zoning district in which the facility is located or required by the city at the time of approval of the special permit;

6.

Oil storage must be in containers approved by the Texas Water Commission. No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, will be visible above the height of the fencing;

7.

Site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis and secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present;

8. Space shall be provided on site for the anticipated peak load of customers to circulate, park and deposit recyclable materials. If the facility is open to the public, space will be provided for a minimum of ten customers or the peak load, whichever is higher;

9. One parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the processing center. Parking requirements will otherwise be as mandated in Chapter 20.14 of this Code;

10.

Noise levels shall be in compliance with Chapter 9.40 of this Code;

11.

Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials will be at least fifty feet from any property line of an existing residential use or existing R, A, PR, SRR, RMU, PMD or NOS zoning district, shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction, shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials;

12.

Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material. The containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited. Facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers;

13.

Sign requirements shall be those provided for in the zoning district in which the facility is located. In addition, facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation;

14. No dust, fumes, smoke, vibration or odor may be detectable on neighboring properties.

B.

Heavy/Light Processing Facilities. Where permitted in an M-2 or M-3 district, heavy and light processing facilities shall comply with the following standards:

1. Facility does not abut a bridge or overpass and shall be located at least one hundred fifty feet from the property lines of an existing residential use or existing R, A, PR, SRR, PMD or NOS zoning district;

2. Shall be located within an enclosed building or enclosed on all sides by a screening fence or wall not less than six feet in height and landscaped on all street frontages;

3. Noise levels shall be in compliance with Chapter 9.40 of this Code;

4.

Heavy processing facilities may accept used motor oil for recycling from the generator in accordance with federal, state and local regulations;

5.

Setbacks shall be those required for in the zoning district in which the facility is located;

6. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the Texas Water Commission.

C.

Waste Processing Facilities. Where permitted by special permit in an M-1 district and where permitted in an M-2 or M-3 district, waste processing facilities shall comply with the following standards:

1. Facility does not abut a bridge or overpass;

2. No waste processing facility may be located within five hundred feet, measured from property line of the waste processing facility to property line of the following:

a. A church;

b. A public or private elementary or secondary school;

c. A nursery school, kindergarten, child care center, day nursery or day care center;

d. A university, college, vocational or business school;

e. A boundary of any R, A, PR, SRR, PMD, RMU or NOS zoning district;

f. A park;

g. The property line of a lot devoted to any residential use;

3.

Facility shall be entirely operating in an enclosed building or:

a. Within an area enclosed by a screening fence having a minimum height of six feet; and

b. Landscaped on all street frontages; and

c.

C.

At least one thousand feet from the property line of the waste processing facility to the property line of existing residential use or existing R, A, PR, SRR, PMD, RMU

or NOS zoning district;

4. Any exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures which are covered, secured and maintained in good condition;

5. Site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis;

6. Noise levels shall be in compliance with Chapter 9.40 of this Code.

(Ord. 16817 § 8, 2008; Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17306, § 4, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 19019, § 4, 1-7-2020)

20.10.500 - Quarries.

A. This district is established in order to reasonably and uniformly limit, safeguard and control future mining, quarrying, excavating, processing and stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, clay and aggregate, for commercial or retail sales in a manner and location which is in the public interest and which is consistent with the comprehensive plan and any supplemental land use and developmental policies which are adopted by the city plan commission and city council.

Includes accessory buildings, equipment, supplies and land which are used solely for the processing, storage, maintenance and sale of materials, operating and security personnel offices, and other uses associated with quarrying, landfill and transfer station operations, also the sale, within a building, of supplies or merchandise normally used or produced in direct connection with a permitted use, or supplies normally used in direct connection with operations and products derived from permitted uses, including, but not limited to, supplies such as cement, rebar, mesh, wooden forms and other concrete finish equipment.

B.

Application for a Q quarry district shall require submittal of the following with the rezoning application:

1.

A metes and bounds description of the proposed district certified by a professional engineer or a registered land surveyor;

2. One copy of the zoning map at a scale of three hundred feet to the inch, outlining in red the area proposed for change of zoning;

3.

Eight copies of a site plan drawn to a scale of not less than one hundred feet to the inch, unless a modification as to scale is authorized by the planning official. This site plan shall show the following:

a. The boundaries of the proposed district;

b. The location, arrangement and use of all existing structures or properties, utility rights-of-way and easements, local and arterial streets, schools, parks and other such features for the proposed district;

c. Existing contours at not more than twenty-foot intervals where the natural slope is greater than five percent, and not more than two-foot intervals where the natural slope is less than five percent;

d. Proposed use(s);

e. Areas of excavation;

f. Proposed contours to which the district is to be excavated.

4.

Two copies of a master drainage plan showing the following:

a.

Impact on the water table;

b. All watershed tributaries to the proposed district;

c. Amount of storm runoff;

d. Proposed method of controlling the expected runoff.

This drainage plan must be accompanied by hydraulic calculations based on the city's one hundred-year storm prediction and must be signed and sealed by a registered professional engineer.

5. For the purpose of erosion control and soil stabilization, a plan showing the method of stabilization. The city engineer may waive this requirement if it is determined to be impossible or impractical.

C.

Responsibilities of the Owner and Operator. The landowner or his authorized agent will bear responsibility for:

1. Obtaining, when required, the services of an engineer or architect authorized to practice in Texas;

2.

All of the legal duties, obligations or liabilities incidental to ownership of the property while the work is in progress or after its completion. The provisions of this chapter will not relieve any person or owner from any responsibility for damages to persons or property otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the city or any official of the city for such damages;

3. Installing the appropriate devices, structures, landscaping and facilities and executing soil stabilization, erosion control, handling of materials and other proper measures to fulfill the intent and purpose of this chapter;

4. Providing continued maintenance and repair of all retaining walls, cribbing, drainage facilities, slopes, landscaping, soil stabilization and erosion control measures and any other protective devices located within the property;

5. Obtaining clearance from all utilities within the boundaries of the district. Failure to clear with any such utility may result in an immediate suspension of the work at the discretion of the building official.

D. Authority of the City Engineer and Building Official. The building official, under authority of this chapter, has the authority to impose any of the following requirements to protect the interest of the property owner, the adjacent property owner and the general public during or after the extraction operation as may be reasonably necessary to cause the work to fulfill the purpose of this chapter:

1. Interim and permanent soil erosion control requirements;

2. Slope stabilization requirements;

3. Work procedures and safety requirements related to transportation of materials on public ways;

4. Fencing or other screening as may be required to protect surrounding properties.

E. Operating Standards.

1. Any permitted quarry operation shall meet all applicable local, state and federal regulations.

2. Any blasting shall be done in accordance with the requirements of this Code, except that no grading permit shall be required as a part of those requirements.

3. A perimeter setback of one hundred feet shall be observed from any site property line for extraction operations and a perimeter setback of twenty- five feet shall be observed from any site property line for any accessory uses.

4. If materials are washed or deposited upon streets, alleys or other public property as a result of improperly controlled activities, the building official shall notify the landowner or operator to remove such materials and restore the streets, alleys or other public property to their original condition. Excessive dirt which is carried from this site onto adjoining streets shall be removed by the operator the same day in which it is deposited.

5. Where the building official finds that a quarry operation is creating an imminent danger of death, personal injury or property damage, he may order that such quarry operation be immediately suspended until the hazardous condition is removed. Notice given under this chapter shall be in writing to the owner, operator, person or agent in charge of such operation.

6.

A quarry operation as permitted in this chapter does not require a grading permit as specified in Chapter 18.44 of this Code;

7. The city council may adopt by resolution a schedule of fees for inspection by city departments and staff called for by this chapter.

F. Authority to Issue Citations.

1. In addition to those authorized to issue citations under this title, the following public officials shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall have the power to issue Class C misdemeanor citations to any persons violating the provisions of this chapter:

a. The city engineer;

b. The assistant city engineer;

c. The subdivision and grading supervisor;

d. The construction engineer;

e.

The assistant construction engineer;

f. All construction inspectors; and

g. The investigative engineer.

2. The public officials designated in subsection (G)(1) of this section are authorized to make inspections of any property necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter.

G.

Penalty. Any person violating this chapter is deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars. In the case of a continuing violation, each day's violation shall be deemed a separate offense.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17442, § 26, 10-26-2010)

20.10.510 - Recreational vehicle parks.

All recreational vehicle parks shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable provisions of the city code.

A.

All recreational vehicle parks and extensions and additions to recreational vehicle parks shall be constructed and maintained in compliance with the following requirements:

1. A recreational vehicle park shall have a minimum of thirty recreational vehicle spaces;

2. A recreational vehicle park shall not exceed a density of twenty-five lots per acre of gross site area;

3. Each lot shall have a minimum of one thousand square feet;

4. Recreational vehicles shall be separated from each other and from all other structures by at least ten feet. For the purposes of such measurement, any accessory to a recreational vehicle, such as an awning or individual storage facility, shall be considered as part of the recreational vehicle;

5. No recreational vehicle shall be closer than twenty feet to the property line adjoining a public street, nor closer than fifteen feet to any property line on which the abutting property residential or apartment zoning;

6. Each lot shall provide adequate support and drainage for the placement of the recreational vehicle;

7. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of a recreational vehicle park shall be paved, covered with stone screening or other solid material, or protected with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and elimination of dust;

8. The ground surface in all parts of a recreational vehicle park shall be graded and equipped to drain all surface water in a safe and efficient manner.

B. Permanent Residential Structure Requirements.

1. At each recreational vehicle park, no more than one existing residential structure may be retained or one new residential structure constructed or installed for occupancy by the owner or operator of the park.

2. An existing structure located on a recreational vehicle park may be converted to an administrative, office or community building for use by the guests of the park. A structure so converted shall meet all city code standards for public occupancy applicable to the proposed use.

C. Internal Street and Parking Requirements.

1. Internal streets and/or driveways, all traffic control devices and street name signs within a recreational vehicle park shall be privately owned, built, and maintained. Internal streets and/or driveways shall be designed for safe and convenient access to all lots and to common facilities. If any portion of the recreational vehicle park is intended for overnight occupancy only, the internal streets and/or driveways should be arranged to accommodate drive-through lots.

2. Internal streets shall be kept open and free of obstruction to allow emergency vehicles to have access to all areas of the recreational vehicle park.

3. Internal streets and/or driveways shall be constructed and maintained to specifications established by city code. They shall be kept free of cracks, holes, and other hazards. Internal streets shall be designed by a professional engineer in accordance with good engineering practices, and shall be approved by the fire chief before a construction permit is issued for the park.

4. Internal streets and/or driveways must meet requirements of the city code.

5.

Dead-end streets and/or driveway lengths shall comply with fire code requirements.

6. Entrances and exits to a recreational vehicle park shall be designed for safe and convenient traffic movement from adjacent public streets onto internal streets or driveways. Entrances and exits from a recreational vehicle park shall not be through a residentially zoned district, nor require traffic movement to or from the park through a residentially zoned district.

7. On all sections of an internal street where parking is prohibited under this section, the owner or operator of the recreational vehicle park shall erect and maintain traffic control signs and street markings prohibiting parking.

8. Each internal street and/or driveway shall be provided with street lighting. Light standards shall have a height and spacing to ensure an average illumination level of not less than 0.2 foot candles.

D.

Recreational Vehicle Lot Requirements. Recreational vehicle park lots shall be occupied only by recreational vehicles.

E.

Utilities. Utilities shall be installed in compliance with all applicable code requirements.

F.

Service and Auxiliary Building Requirements. This section shall apply to all service buildings, recreation buildings, management offices, repair shops, storage areas, sanitary facilities, laundry facilities, indoor recreation areas, commercial buildings supplying essential goods or services for park tenants, and other similar buildings in recreational vehicle parks.

1. All service and auxiliary buildings shall be located to be convenient to the recreational vehicle lots they service and shall be kept clean.

2. Each park shall contain one or more service buildings providing separate sanitary facilities for men and women.

3. No lot space shall be located farther than five hundred feet from such a service building.

4. The entrances to such buildings shall be clearly marked to show which gender the facilities serve.

5. Fixtures shall be provided in accordance with the plumbing code.

6. Each recreational vehicle park shall contain waste disposal stations for the sole purpose of removing and disposing of wastes from recreational vehicle holding tanks in a clean, efficient and convenient manner.

G.

Fire Code Safety Instruction Requirements.

1. Each recreational vehicle park owner or operator shall ensure that its park staff is instructed in the use of park fire protection equipment and in their specific duties in the event of a fire.

2. The fire chief may make printed safety instructions available to all recreational vehicle park owners or operators for distribution to their guests.

H.

Construction plan requirements. A construction plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the building official prior to issuance of a building

permit that identifies the following:

1. The area and dimensions of the tract of land, identifying its location and boundaries;

2. The number, location, and size of all recreational vehicle lots;

3. The location, width, and specifications of driveways, roadways and walkways;

4. The location and details of lighting, public telephones, and electrical and gas systems;

5. The location and specifications of water and sewer lines and sewer service riser pipes;

6. The location and specifications of all buildings constructed or to be constructed within the park;

7. Existing and proposed topography of the park;

8. The location of fire mains including the size of the main, fire hydrants, and fire extinguishment equipment, and available fire flow; and

9. Such other information as may be reasonably required by the building official in the review of the construction plan.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17442, § 27, 10-26-2010)

20.10.520 - Recycling collection facilities.

A.

Small Collection Facilities. Small collection facilities may be located in commercial, manufacturing and industrial zones provided they comply with the following standards:

1.

Shall be established as an accessory use to a permitted commercial, manufacturing or industrial use which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the city;

2.

Shall be no larger than two thousand square feet and occupy no more than ten parking spaces, not including space that will be periodically needed for removal of materials or exchange of containers. For mobile facilities the size of the trailer shall not exceed five hundred square feet;

3. Shall be set at least ten feet from any property line and not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation. However, this setback requirement may be modified by the zoning administrator following a report by the traffic engineer that a reduced setback will not obstruct visibility or create a traffic safety problem;

4.

Shall accept those items defined as recyclable materials in Section 9.04.030 of this Code. Used oil may be accepted as permitted by and in accordance with Chapter 15.20, which must be recycled in compliance with state and federal law;

5. Power-driven processing equipment shall be permitted, provided the equipment does not exceed the noise standards contained in Chapter 9.40 of this Code;

6. Shall use containers that are constructed of durable material, covered when site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected during collection hours;

7. Shall store all recyclable material in containers or in the mobile unit vehicle, and shall not leave materials outside of containers when attendant is not present;

8. Shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and mobile facilities, at which truck or containers are removed at the end of each collection day, shall be swept at the end of each collection day;

9. Attended facilities located within fifty feet of a property line of an existing residential use or existing R, A, PR, SRR, RMU, PMD or NOS zoning district shall operate only during the hours between nine a.m. and seven p.m.;

10.

Containers for the twenty-four-hour donation of materials shall be at least thirty feet from any property line abutting an existing residential use or an existing R, A, PR, SRR, RMU, PMD or NOS zoning district;

11.

Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material which may be deposited; the facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation, and display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers;

12.

Small collection facilities may have identification signs with a maximum of forty percent per side, in addition to informational signs and shall be restricted to on-premises advertising;

13.

No additional parking spaces will be required for customers of a small collection facility located at the established parking lot of a primary use. However, one space will be provided for the attendant;

14. Mobile units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present;

15.

Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant may not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary use; and

16.

Small collection facilities shall not be located in an area that obstructs the visibility of oncoming traffic exiting from adjacent driveways.

B.

Large Collection Facilities. Where permitted in a district, large collection facilities shall comply with the following standards:

1. Facility does not abut a bridge or overpass or the property lines of an existing residential use or an existing R, A, PR, SRR, RMU, PMD or NOS zoning district;

2. Facility will be screened from the public right-of-way by operating in an enclosed building or:

a. Within an area enclosed by a screening fence having a minimum height of six feet,

b. At least one hundred fifty feet from the property line of existing residential use or existing R, A, PR, SRR, RMU or PMD zoning district, and

c. Meets all applicable noise standards required by city code;

3. Setbacks and landscape requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located, or the setbacks and landscaping imposed by the city at the time of rezoning or special permit approval;

4. All exterior storage of material shall be in study containers or enclosures which are covered, secured and maintained in good condition, or shall be baled or palletized. Oil storage must be in containers complying with state and federal regulations. No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, will be visible above the height of the fencing;

5. Site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis;

6. Space will be provided on site for six vehicles or the anticipated peak customer load, whichever is higher, to circulate and to deposit recyclable materials, except where the traffic engineer determines that allowing overflow traffic above six vehicles is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety;

7.

One parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the large recycling facility. Otherwise, parking requirements will be as provided for in Chapter 20.14 of this Code;

8. Noise levels shall be in conformance with Chapter 9.40 of this Code;

9. If the proposed facility is located within five hundred feet of existing residential use or existing R, A, PR, SRR, RMU, PMD or NOS zoning district, it shall not be in operation between seven p.m. and seven a.m.;

10.

Any containers provided for after-hours donation or recyclable materials will be at least fifty feet from any property line of an existing residential use or existing R, A, PR, SRR, RMU, PMD or NOS zoning district, shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction, shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials;

11.

Donation areas will be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material, and the containers will be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited; facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers;

12. Facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation; identification and informational signs will meet the standards of the zone; and directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the traffic engineer, if necessary, to facilitate traffic circulation or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way;

13. Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment may be approved at the discretion of the director of the department of environmental services if noise and other conditions are met; and

14. The owner/operator shall obtain a permit in compliance with all applicable regulations.

(Ord. 16817 §§ 7, 9, 2008; Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17306, § 4, 4-6-2010)

20.10.530 - Resident watchmen facilities.

Dwellings for resident watchmen or property caretakers employed on the premises are permitted accessory uses, not to exceed one dwelling per site.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.540 - Residential manufactured home subdivision.

The purpose of this district is to provide for needed, properly planned and well-designed manufactured home subdivisions in areas where public utilities are available and to establish basic standards for the character of the use and to mitigate any adverse effect on surrounding properties.

A. In manufactured home subdivisions in the RMH district, the minimum dimension of lots and yards and the height of buildings shall be as shown in the accompanying table, and the following standards:

1. No more than one manufactured home shall be located on any one subdivisions lot;

2. Skirting shall be required on all manufactured homes;

3. All manufactured homes shall be anchored to a permanent foundation; and

4. No manufactured home shall be placed for occupancy at any location without the owner or owners first having obtained a placement permit from the building official.

Table Inset:

4 acre minimum 4,000 square feet minimum per unit 90 feet minimum 40 feet minimum

Land area

Lot area

Lot depth

Lot width

Lot coverage

50 percent maximum

Front yard 20 feet minimum Rear yard 5 feet minimum Side-interior lot 5 feet minimum Side abutting street 10 feet minimum Height 35 feet maximum

B. All areas not covered by structures or paved surfaces shall be landscaped and maintained by the owner.

C. Prior to the sale of any lots in a manufactured home subdivision, a screening fence or wall forty-two inches in height shall be installed along all boundaries of the subdivision which abut a public right-of-way (lots fronting on a public right-of-way abutting the subdivision and driveways excepted) and a screening fence or wall no less than forty-two inches in height and no more than six feet in height shall be installed along boundaries of the subdivision which abut property not included in the subdivision.

D. Fire protection facilities shall be provided in accordance with requirements of the city fire department.

E. At least one off-street parking space shall be provided on each manufactured home site.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.550 - Restricted residential mixed-use development.

A. Purpose. The purpose of a restricted residential mixed-use development is to create a unique environment for a hub of activity and a focal point for a given area, reflecting the identity of the area by providing a variety of land uses that coexist in a multi-use residential setting. The mix of land uses are functionally connected to create a cohesive development which facilitates new development, but also provides for the retention and integration of existing residential types and intensities. The mixed-use area shall provide for a group of land uses that meet the daily needs of the area.

B. Designation.

1. An application for a residential mixed-use development may be initiated by a property owner or group of property owners of land within the area of request, by the city plan commission, or by the El Paso City Council.

2. The area of request shall be designated for mixed-use within the city's projected land use element of the adopted comprehensive plan, "The Plan for El Paso."

3. The area of request shall be wholly included in a city adopted specific study area plan for the area, which sets the written and graphic description of the concerns, objectives, guidelines, and design standards for guiding the development of the area.

The area of request shall be wholly designated as a neighborhood conservancy overlay as provided in Section 20.10.400 of this title.

There shall be no minimum site requirement for a restricted residential mixed-use development, provided, however, that it is the intent of these regulations that an area of sufficient size be developed or redeveloped symbiotically with adjacent land. Extensions to a restricted residential mixed-use development from a common boundary may be considered and shall not require a minimum site area.

C.

Use Regulations. In addition to the uses permitted by the underlying zoning district, buildings, structures, or premises may be used, erected, altered or enlarged for the following uses. A special permit granted by the city should specifically enumerate which of the following uses are permitted as part of the restricted residential mixed-use development.

1. Residential dwellings, including detached single-family, two-family, attached single-family and multi-family;

2. Business and professional offices, including doctor's offices, clinics and other medical practitioners;

3. Studio for professional work or teaching of any form of commercial or fine arts;

4. Bakery;

5. Drugstore;

6. Ice cream parlor;

op ND 7. Restaurant or cafe, excluding drive-in types;

8. Grocery or convenience store;

9. Variety store;

10.

Barber or beauty shop;

11.

Dry-cleaning shop or laundromat;

12. Health or fitness studio;

13. Travel agency;

14.

Specialty retail uses such as an antique store, art gallery, bookstore, florist, gift shop, or hobby store;

15.

Community buildings and recreational facilities (publicly or privately owned);

16. Bed and breakfast establishment;

17.

Boardinghouse (rooming or lodging house);

18. Commercial day care center or nursery;

19. Accessory uses customarily found in connection with any of the enumerated permitted uses.

D. Property Development Standards. Where permitted in a district, a restricted residential mixed-use development shall comply with the development standards of the underlying zoning district and as otherwise provided in this title, except as herein modified. These provisions shall apply to and be enforceable upon any new construction, reconstruction or renovation of buildings, structures, or premises made to accommodate uses permitted as part of a restricted residential mixed-use development.

1. Residential dwellings physically integrated with offices and commercial establishments within a site are permitted, and are deemed most in keeping with the objectives of this section for the development of a balanced community.

2. All permanent storage and display operations shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building or structure.

3. Off-street parking requirements contained in Chapter 20.14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements) of this title shall not be required of uses permitted in a restricted residential mixed-use development; provided, however, that where adequate area within a site is available to accommodate required off-street parking (whether wholly or partially) within a rear area of a site, such off-street parking may be provided.

4. On-premises advertising for strictly nonresidential uses within a restricted residential mixed-use development shall be restricted to wall or monument signs. One sign not exceeding thirty square feet in size shall be permitted per street frontage. The height of a monument sign shall not exceed six feet in height. Signs shall be pedestrian-oriented and shall not detract from the character of the area. On-premises advertising for a residential mixed-use development consisting of residential uses physically integrated with office and commercial uses, whether wholly or partially, shall be restricted in the same manner as described above except that the maximum sign area permitted per street frontage shall be twenty square feet.

5.

No building shall exceed the height limitations of the underlying zoning district, except where it can be demonstrated that the additional height will not have a detrimental effect on the surrounding land uses or the visual pattern of the area.

6. Existing or proposed multi-story buildings that are intended for retail sales or variety stores shall be designed to allow for commercial usage on the ground floor level only, and a mix of residential types and intensities on the upper floors.

7. Uses shall be innovatively designed by means of emphasizing pedestrian orientation.

8. In addition to the landscape requirements contained in Title 18 (Buildings and Construction) of this Code, any part of the total site area not required for buildings, structures, loading and vehicular access ways, parking and utility areas, pedestrian walks, and hard surfaced activity areas shall be landscaped.

9.

A minimum of one-fourth of the total site area shall be provided as open space to provide visual continuity within the area, and a variety of spaces in

the streetscape. Of the open space area, no more than one-half of the area may be used for non-permeable surfaces such as parking areas or driveways.

10. The residential appearance of any portion of an existing residential building or structure within the site that is converted wholly or partially to a permitted mixed-use shall be maintained.

E. Additional requirements. In approving a restricted residential mixed-use development, the city plan commission may recommend and the city council may impose additional reasonable requirements necessary to protect the public interest and welfare of the community. In the event that the design standards of the applicable study area plan are more restrictive or impose higher (or different) standards than the requirements of this title, the design standards of the applicable study area plan shall govern. Copies of adopted study area plans are on file in the office of the planning official.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17442, § 28, 10-26-2010)

20.10.555 - Urban reserve district (URD).

A. When development is proposed on land zoned URD, the land shall be developed in accordance with provisions of Title 21 — SmartCode. Prior to development URD property will be rezoned SmartCode.

B. Utility Facilities and Thoroughfares within an URD Zone. Land zoned URD may be used as necessary for utility facilities and thoroughfare construction projects. Permissible uses and uses allowed by special permit are identified in Appendix A. Any thoroughfare construction projects shall comply with the Institute for Transportation Engineers (ITE) Designing Walkable Urban Thoroughfares: A Context Sensitive Approach, An ITE Recommended Practice as amended.

(Ord. No. 17547, § 3, 5-3-2011)

20.10.557 - Utility green space.

20.10.557 - Utility green space.

A.

The purpose of these regulations is to protect and conserve lands designated as utility green space while still allowing certain necessary water,

wastewater and stormwater utility systems as secondary purposes to the area. Utility green space serves to:

1. Add to the existing open space system and enhance the ecological, hydrological, and recreational vitality of the existing Franklin Mountains State Park and foothill areas;

2. Promote planning and growth that emphasizes sustainability in our built and natural environments;

3.

Promote careful management to reduce environmental impacts to the water, waste water and stormwater systems in the community;

4. Protect healthy ecosystems through environmental management and measurement by:

a. Reducing impervious cover that contributes to degradation of water resources;

b. Reducing rainfall pollutant loads to streams and other water resources;

c. Reducing potential pressure to encroach on utility resource buffer areas;

d. Reducing soil erosion potential by reducing the amount of clearing and grading required;

e. Promoting erosion and sediment control;

f. Reducing capital cost of utility infrastructure;

g. Reducing cost of stormwater management by concentrating runoff and reducing volumes;

h. Promote a high quality, sustainable utility system that conserves and protects land, watershed, wastewater, reclaimed water and water resources;

i. Optimize best practices in planning, engineering and management that will protect the environment; and

j. Protect the ecological and geological health and function of green space.

B. Where utility green space is designated, a conservation covenant may be required to provide further protections to the area. Any conveyance of the utility green space to the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department shall incorporate the requirements of this section as a condition of donation and acceptance of the land.

C. In addition to allowing use of the land for water, waste water, and stormwater utility systems, other passive recreational uses and activities customarily found in conserved natural areas are also permitted (such as trail corridors and trailheads, scenic outlooks, and pedestrian walking and jogging paths). Notwithstanding the allowable uses and activities described in this section, the mandating restriction of uses and activities permitted on land within a utility green space designated property shall be as set forth in the conservation covenant, where applicable. The conservation covenant shall enumerate the use(s) permitted and prohibited, shall detail how use of the land shall be authorized pursuant to this section, and shall include a management plan for maintenance, monitoring and enforcement of these use provisions. In no case shall a use not satisfying the general intent of these regulations be permitted as a provision of the conservation covenant.

D.

Any property designated as utility green space shall be subject to the development standards of the El Paso City Code as part of construction,

reconstruction, or alteration of any permitted use, and any additional development standards as may be enumerated in the conservation covenant.

E. For purposes of this section, water, waste water, and stormwater utility systems shall mean the systems of the city as they may be constructed or now exist and may be improved, added to, or extended hereafter, there being included in such term all water, sewer and stormwater facilities now or hereafter owned or operated by the El Paso Water Utilities - Public Service Board, and including all real and personal property comprising any part of or used or useful in the operation of the water, waste water, and stormwater facilities of the city. Specific facilities shall include, but not be limited to, any facility or structure that stores, pumps, conveys, treats, or disposes of potable water, reclaimed water, wastewater, and/or stormwater and the associated residuals with the appropriate resource buffer zone. In addition, other public utility facilities which serve to distribute and transmit electrical power, gas and other essential service necessary to the water, waste water, and stormwater utility systems are also authorized.

F. Utility green space designated within a development shall not be considered a park under any circumstances, nor shall acceptance of a dedication and maintenance by the city be required.

(Ord. No. 17904, § 2, 11-6-2012)

20.10.560 - Restaurants, drive-in.

Drive-in restaurants are not permitted in a C-l or mixed use zoning district within two hundred feet of a residential use or an R-l, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-5, PR- I, PR-II, PMD or NOS zoning district.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17306, § 4, 4-6-2010)

20.10.570 - Retail and service facilities.

Retail and service uses such as newsstands, cafeterias and retail stores are permitted inside an office building when primarily for the use of occupants thereof and occupants or other buildings in the development.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.580 - Reverse vending machines.

20.10.580 - Reverse vending machines.

A.

Reverse Vending Machine(s). Reverse vending machine(s) may be permitted in all commercial, manufacturing and industrial zones; provided, that they comply with the following standards:

1. Shall be established as an accessory use to a permitted commercial, manufacturing or industrial use and is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the city;

2. Shall not occupy required parking spaces for the primary use;

3. Shall occupy no more than one hundred fifty square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than eleven feet in height;

4. Shall be constructed and maintained with durable material;

5. Shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone numbers of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative;

6. Shall have a cumulative sign area not exceeding fifty square feet per machine, exclusive of operating instructions and shall be restricted to on- premises advertising;

7. Shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis;

8. Shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if the facility operates during nighttime hours;

9. Reverse vending machines shall not be located in an area that obstructs the visibility of traffic entering or exiting adjacent driveways.

(Ord. 16817 § 10, 2008; Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.590 - Satellite receiving dishes and antennas.

Satellite receiving dishes measuring more than one meter in diameter and other satellite receiving antennas shall comply with the following:

A. In residential and apartment districts:

1.

The following setbacks shall be observed:

a. Four feet from interior lot lines,

b. If on a corner lot: the side street yard requirement for buildings in the district in which it is located,

c. If in the rear yard: five feet from the rear lot line,

d. If in the front yard: sixty feet from the front lot line,

e. If in side yard: sixty feet from the front lot line and the side yard requirement for buildings in the district in which it is located;

2.

The following standards shall be observed:

a. Any such antennas plus other permitted accessory structures shall not occupy more than forty percent of the yard in which located,

b. When detached structurally from the main building the maximum overall height of any such antennas from ground level shall not exceed twenty-four feet,

c. When roof-mounted or attached to the main building, any such antennas shall conform to the height standard of the district in which located. The installation of any roof-mounted dish or antenna and those attached to the main building exceeding twenty-four feet in height shall be designed or checked and approved by a registered professional engineer or a registered professional architect.

B. In commercial, manufacturing and industrial districts:

1. The following standards shall be observed:

a. The antenna may be located anywhere within the buildable area of the lot, with no part of the antenna projecting beyond such buildable area or onto the twenty-foot visibility triangle,

b. When installed in conjunction with commercial or public radio and television broadcasting and microwave receiving facilities, a special permit shall be required except where the commercial or public radio and television broadcasting and microwave receiving facility is a permitted use by special permit or otherwise.

C.

All design, installation and construction of any such antennas shall comply with the building code of the city.

D.

No form of advertising or other identification is allowed on the dish or framework other than manufacturer's identification plates or stamps not exceeding one square foot in area.

E. In historic districts, must additionally comply with Chapter 20.20 (Historic Preservation).

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. 16653 8 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.600 - Secondary manufactured homes (ranch-farm district only).

Secondary manufactured home units are permitted in the ranch and farm zoning district on a site of at least one acre, provided the following conditions are met:

A. A placement permit is obtained from the building official;

B. Manufactured home meets requirements of National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards;

C.

All additions to the manufactured home shall be engineered and built to comply with currently applicable manufactured home construction standards;

D.

Manufactured home does not exceed a height of sixteen feet;

E. Manufactured home shall have nonflammable skirting around its perimeter to screen its wheels and undercarriage from view;

F. Fire protection facilities shall be provided as required by the fire department;

G.

A setback of twenty feet shall be maintained from any building or accessory structure;

H. A setback of twenty-five feet shall be maintained from any property line;

I. Such manufactured home shall be used only as a residence, and in no case shall be used for rental or commercial purposes; and

J. A special permit granted pursuant to this section shall be for a period of two years. The city council may, upon application of the owner, approve a one-year extension of this time period, but in no case shall the total time period exceed a maximum of three years. The zoning board of adjustment shall not have jurisdiction to grant any variance or exception from the requirements of this subsection.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17235, § 3, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. 17442, §§ 21, 30, 10-26-2010)

20.10.610 - Self-storage warehousing.

In A-1, A-2 and A-3 (Apartment), A-M (Apartment-Manufactured home), A-O (Apartment/Office), A/3-0 (Apartment/Office High Density), RMU (Residential Mixed Use), GMU (General Mixed Use), C-1 and C-2 (Commercial) Districts the following conditions apply:

A. A minimum site area of two acres shall be required, unless adjacent to and abutting a minimum of four acres zoned C-1, C-2, C-3 or C-4, then the minimum site area shall be one acre with an average lot width of not less than two hundred feet and an average lot depth of not less than two hundred feet.

B. Individual storage spaces shall not exceed four hundred square feet in area and fourteen feet in height, except in the case of storage spaces for RVs and motor homes, which shall not exceed twenty feet in width and sixty feet in length.

C. A six foot high screening wall shall be required along all property lines abutting residential or apartment uses or districts.

Additionally, the following conditions shall apply in the C-5 (Commercial) Districts:

A. A self-storage warehouse shall not occupy the first floor of a building. Permitted activities for the first floor shall be limited to the retail portion of the operation where customer transactions occur and/or in combination with another permitted use in the zoning district.

B. The portion of the building containing the self-storage warehouse shall be limited to no more than eighty percent of the total gross floor area.

C. Self-storage warehouses shall only be permitted in existing structures. If no structure exists, then self-storage warehouses shall conform with the design requirements of Section 20.10.280.C, infill development.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 019734, § 3, 5-28-2025)

20.10.620 - Sexually oriented businesses.

A. No person shall own, operate or conduct any business in an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or nude live entertainment club within one thousand feet of the following:

1. A church;

2. A public or private elementary or secondary school;

on raw WYN 3. A nursery school, kindergarten, child care center, day nursery or day care center;

4. A university, college, vocational or business school;

5. A boundary of any residential district;

6. A public park adjacent to a residential district;

7. The property line of a lot devoted to any residential use;

8. Another adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or nude live entertainment club.

B.

For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:

B. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:

1. Conduct Any Business. Any person who does any one or more of the following shall be deemed to be conducting business:

a. Operates a cash register, cash drawer or other depository on the adult business premises where cash funds or records of credit card or other credit transactions generated in any manner by the operation of the establishment or the activities conducted therein are kept;

b. Displays or takes orders from any customer for any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered on the adult business premises;

c. Delivers or provides to any customer any merchandise, goods, entertainment or other services offered on the adult business premises;

d. Acts as a door attendant to regulate the entry of customers or other persons into the business premises; and

e. Supervises or manages other persons in the performance of any of the foregoing activities on the business premises.

2.

"Entertainment" means any act or performance, such as a play, skit, reading, revue, pantomime, scene, song, dance, musical rendition or striptease, whether performed by employees, agents, contractors or customers. The term "entertainment" shall also mean bartenders, waiters, waitresses or other employees exposing "specified anatomical areas" or engaging in "specified sexual activities" in the presence of customers.

3.

"Operator" means the manager or other natural person principally in charge of an adult business regulated in this section.

4.

"Owner" or "owners" means the proprietor if a sole proprietorship, all partners (general and limited) if a partnership, or all officers, directors and persons holding ten percent of the outstanding shares if a corporation.

C. For the purposes of this section, measurements shall be made in a straight line, from the nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises of a regulated use to the nearest property line of any uses listed in subsection A of this section.

D.

Any adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater or nude live entertainment club lawfully in existence on February 10, 1987, and not in compliance with the zoning provisions of the city code, shall be deemed a nonconforming use and shall comply with all of the provisions of the zoning code regulating such uses by February 10, 1988. In the case of any such uses being located within one thousand feet of each other, the use first established and continually operating shall be allowed to continue to operate at its location, provided such use complies with all other provisions of the zoning code.

E.

The subsequent establishment of any use set forth in subsection A of this section within one thousand feet of a previously existing use regulated by this section shall not render such use a nonconforming or unlawful use.

F. The regulations in this zoning code of adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters and nude live entertainment clubs are intended to be land use controls meant to regulate the harmful secondary effects of such uses only, and shall not be construed as being intended to limit access by adults to sexually oriented material, activity or expression, protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution.

G. Signage. The owner or operator of an adult entertainment use may erect, construct and maintain signs allowed by and conforming with Chapter 20.18 of this Code.

H. If any section, subsection, clause or any portion of the regulations in this zoning code regulating adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters and nude live entertainment clubs is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code regulating such uses.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.625 - Small lot development.

A. The standards in this section supersede the base zoning districts standards.

B. To meet the requirements of a small lot development, the parcel to be platted shall meet all the following requirements:

1. Shall be five acres or more:

2. Have no previously recorded plat: and

3. Lots shall not exceed four thousand square feet.

C. When all the provisions of 20.10.625.B are met, the following shall apply:

1. Lot Size.

a. Minimum lot area: Two thousand two hundred fifty square feet.

b. Minimum average lot width: Thirty feet.

c. Minimum lot depth: Seventy-five feet.

2. Minimum Setbacks.

a. Front setback: Fifteen feet.

b. Rear setback: Ten feet.

c. Side setback: Five feet.

d. Cumulative setbacks: N/A.

D. Parking minimum: One per residential unit.

E.

For subdivisions located in on-site ponding areas a minimum of thirty percent permeable area shall be provided.

F. Small lot developments shall not be located:

1. Within three thousand feet of an airport or military base; or

2. Fifteen thousand feet of the boundary of a military base if the area is designated by a municipality or joint airport zoning board, as applicable, as a military airport overlay zone with a clear zone and accident potential zone designation, as described by the military base's air installation compatible use zone report.

(Ord. No. 019815, § 3, 11-18-2025)

20.10.630 - Storage of supplies (in connection with a permitted use).

Storage of supplies, merchandise, equipment or goods normally carried in stock, used or produced in connection with a permitted use is allowed within a building, or shall be screened from any abutting public street or other abutting property by a solid masonry wall or chain link fence with slats not less than six feet in height.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.640 - Swimming pools and spas.

A. In any district where permitted as an accessory use, unenclosed swimming pools and spas may occupy a required rear or side yard, provided they are not located closer than five feet to a rear or side lot line. A walk space at least four feet wide shall be provided between pool walls and protective fences and building or other walls. A deck surrounding at least sixty-five percent or more of the swimming pool or spa shall be provided, however, in no case shall other structures restrict emergency access or create above deck structures that may be used as diving platforms or create other safety or sanitary hazards.

B. Swimming pools and spas listed under permitted uses in any district shall comply with the yard and other standards of the district in which located.

C. Every residential outdoor swimming pool and spa shall comply with the requirements of the Residential Code, Chapter 18.10.

D. Every public swimming pool and spa shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 9.48 of this Code.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.650 - Temporary buildings or structures (incidental to construction).

Temporary buildings, or structures, including mobile or relocatable home office or storage units, the uses of which are incidental to construction operations during development being conducted on the same tract or subdivision are permitted and shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of such construction, or upon the expiration of a period of four years of (from) the time of erection of such temporary buildings, whichever is sooner.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.660 - Temporary buildings or structures (incidental to sales or rental).

Temporary buildings or structures, including a mobile or relocatable office unit for use as sales or rental office for an approved real estate development or subdivision, located on the same tract as the real estate development or subdivision are permitted and shall be removed upon completion or abandonment of the project or upon the expiration of a period of four years, whichever is sooner.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.670 - Temporary sales stands.

Temporary sales standards for the sale of farm or ranch products produced on the premises, provided only one such stand may be used on each farm or ranch, and the stand shall contain not more than six hundred square feet of floor space and shall be located not less than thirty feet from the adjoining property and not less than forty feet from the roadway, and temporary off-street parking for at least five vehicles is provided, the parking area to meet the requirements of Chapter 20.14 of this Code.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.680 - Temporary uses.

A. Intent and purpose. The intent of this section is to accommodate reasonable requests for interim or temporary uses when such activities are desirable for the community, or are temporarily required in the process of establishing a permitted use or constructing a public facility. Temporary uses allowed under this section shall be consistent with the health, safety and general welfare of persons residing and working in the community, shall be conducted so as not to cause any detrimental effects on surrounding properties and the community, and shall not violate any other ordinance or state and federal regulations.

Application requirements for a temporary use permit.

1. The application and supporting documents for a temporary use permit shall be prepared in accordance with the specifications outlined below.

a.

Submit a complete building permit application.

Submit a complete building permit application.

b.

Submit a complete site plan to include the following items:

b. Submit a complete site plan to include the following items:

(1) The location of all temporary structures proposed property and permanent structures on the property shall be shown on the site plan.

(2)

The location of any tie downs or guy wires within the property.

(2) The location of any tie downs or guy wires within the property.

(3)

The internal parking layout to include all driveways within the property.

(3) The internal parking layout to include all driveways within the property.

(4) If structures are proposed to be located within a parking lot, include the parking calculations showing that the proposed temporary use will not reduce the minimum required parking for all primary permanent existing uses located on the site.

(5)

Location of sign(s), screening walls, fencing and electric meter locations or temporary power sources if applicable.

(6) The setbacks from property lines shall be shown on the site plan.

2.

All temporary use permits are valid for the period and location specified in the permit issued for the temporary use, however for no longer than six months within the same calendar year at which time it is deemed expired.

3.

Individual temporary structures as part of the permit shall not exceed a total of one hundred square feet in size and shall be accessory to the primary use on the lot.

4. Applicant shall have the approval of the plan review building official.

5.

If use is conducted on property that is owned by a separate owner, a notarized letter from the property owner or an authorized agent, granting permission to the applicant to use the property for the temporary use and permission to use any restroom facilities located on the property.

6.

Restroom facilities are required. If restroom facilities are unavailable on the site, a portable facility may be used.

ND

7.

Any tents, membrane structures or canopies used in conjunction with a temporary use permit shall comply with all other provisions of the city code.

8. Payment of established fee for a temporary use permit.

9.

The site shall be cleaned up and returned to its original state as found by the applicant. Clean up shall begin within a twenty-four-hour period after the applicant has stopped using the site for the permitted temporary use.

10.

The use shall not be conducted between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. except where specifically allowed under the permit issued.

11.

Temporary structures shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from the front property line and shall not hinder the visibility sight triangle.

C. Temporary uses allowed.

1. Seasonal sales of food items. Applicant shall obtain the approval of the director of public health. This use is only allowed in a ranch and farm or a developed lot located in C-1 to C-5 (Commercial), M-1 (Manufacturing) and GMU General Mixed Use zone districts. This use includes: a. Seasonal sales of food items.

b. Farmers markets.

c. Mobile structures for seasonal sales of food items.

2. Seasonal sales of non-food items. This use is only allowed in a developed lot located in C-1 to C-5 (Commercial), M-1 (Manufacturing) and GMU General Mixed Use zone districts. This use includes:

a. Christmas Tree lots.

b. Pumpkin sales lots.

c. Sales from mobile structures.

d. Temporary mobile structures.

e. Mobile structures for temporary sales.

3.

Temporary places of assembly. This use is allowed on a developed lot and only on an undeveloped lot that complies with parking regulations for temporary lots in Chapter 20.14 (Off-Street Parking, Loading and Storage) and Title 30 of the Texas Administrative Code Chapters 101 and 111. These uses shall be permitted in the following zoning districts: R-F (Ranch and Farm), C-1 to C-5 (Commercial), M-1 (Manufacturing), GMU (General Mixed Use) and P-I (Planned Industrial). Applications for temporary places of assembly will be required to obtain all necessary permits. Temporary places of assembly include the following uses:

a. Haunted house.

b. Fair, circus, rodeo, festival, carnival or concert operated at a location other than a stadium, auditorium or other public assembly facility designed to accommodate such an event. These uses must meet all of the following requirements:

(1) The property in which the temporary use will operate is at least three acres or more in size.

(2) There shall be at least a buffer zone of one thousand five hundred feet between the area, in which the use will operate, and any residential zoning district or use. This measurement will be measured from the outermost footprint of the event including all required parking.

(3) The temporary event shall comply with all of the parking requirements of Title 20.

(4) Additional requirements:

(a) Any property zoned R-F is limited to hosting these uses to three times per calendar year.

(b)

Events held on property zoned R-F where an applicant estimates that the event will have more than five hundred people in attendance at peak hours will require approval from city council prior to the issuance of a temporary use permit.

4. Temporary real estate offices or rental offices. This use requires the placement of a Texas Industrialized building. The use may include a sales/rental office for an approved real estate development or subdivision. The use must be located on the same property as the development or subdivision. The use must be removed after completion or abandonment of the project or after a four-year period, whichever is sooner.

5. Temporary tents, membrane structures or canopies. The applicant must provide proof that the structure is of flame resistant material or is treated with a flame retardant which meets the requirements of NFPA 701. Tents in excess of two hundred square feet, or a canopy in excess of four hundred square feet will require review and approval from the fire department and an operational permit will be required from the fire marshal's office, except that the following temporary uses will not require an operational permit:

a. Tents used exclusively for recreational camping purposes.

b. Fabric canopies and awnings open on all sides which comply with all of the following:

(1) Individual canopies shall have a maximum size of seven hundred square feet (65 m2).

(2) The aggregate area of multiple canopies placed side by side without a fire break clearance of twelve feet (3.7 m) shall not exceed seven hundred square feet (65 m2) total.

(3) A minimum clearance of twelve feet (3.7 m) to structures and other tents shall be provided.

D.

The following temporary uses may be permitted without the issuance of a temporary permit:

1. Temporary structures such as construction sheds, canopies, tents and fences used in construction work in conjunction with a building or grading permit. Such structure shall be allowed for a limited amount of time and shall be completely removed upon the completion of the work authorized by the building or grading permit.

2. Temporary structures such as construction sheds, canopies, tents and fences used in construction work in conjunction with a public works or city, county, state or federal project. Such structure shall be allowed for a limited amount of time and shall be completely removed upon the completion of the work authorized by the building or grading permit.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17235, § 3, 11-10-2009; Ord. No. 17314, § 1, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 17442, §§ 21, 31, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17557, § 3, 5-17-2011; Ord. No. 17757, § 1, 3-20-2012; Ord. No. 17927, § 1, 1-15-2013; Ord. No. 18371, § 2, 6-16-2015; Ord. No. 18506, § 1, 5-24-2016; Ord. No. 18663, § 1, 4-18-2017)

20.10.690 - Tennis clubs.

Where permitted in a district, tennis clubs shall comply with the following requirements:

A. Dimensional Standards. At any tennis club developed pursuant to the provisions of this section, buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered shall have:

1.

A front yard on any street equal to that required in underlying zoning district. Such front yard shall not be used for the parking of vehicles,

2. A rear yard equal to that required in underlying zoning district, or twenty-five feet in depth, whichever is greater,

3. Side yards equal to that required in underlying zoning district, or fifteen feet in depth, whichever is greater,

4. A building height not in excess of two and one-half stories,

5. An average lot width of not less than two hundred feet,

6. A lot or site area of not less than two acres,

7. Off-street parking as required in Chapter 20.14;

B. Permitted accessory uses:

1. Pro shop,

2. Handball courts,

3. Restaurant or bar or restaurant or combination thereof,

4. Locker room,

5. Sauna bath,

6. Swimming pool.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.695 - Transfer of development rights.

A. Purpose.

1.

In order to provide regulatory incentives to permanently restrict urbanization of certain environmentally sensitive areas, or to allow certain vested projects to be relocated to another appropriate location, this section establishes two types of transfer of development rights. In all cases, the transfer of development rights from sending to receiving parcels shall be at the voluntary request and requires a special permit application of the landowners of both parcels.

a. Environmentally sensitive areas. A special permit for transfer of development rights (TDR) shall be permitted when approved by the El Paso City Council pursuant to the provisions of this section.

b. Vested projects. When a determination as to project vesting has been made pursuant to Section 1.04.070 of this Code, a property owner may be allowed to relocate that project to another appropriate parcel of land, when approved by the El Paso City Council pursuant to the provisions of this section.

2.

For purposes of this section, environmentally sensitive areas shall include areas designated as such by local, state or federal documentation. If governmental documentation cannot be produced with an environmentally sensitive designation that meets the following criteria, then the city engineer and director of environmental services may evaluate the property and determine if it meets one or more of the following characteristics. If the city engineer and director of environmental services determine it is not an environmentally sensitive area as defined herein a special permit application may not be processed.

a. Areas with significant natural features;

b. Areas which enhance the open space and aesthetic qualities of the land;

c. Areas that protect agricultural resources;

d. Areas necessary for the preservation of natural resources;

e. Areas containing habitats for threatened or endangered species;

f. Wetlands and wetland transition areas;

g. Aquifer recharge and discharge areas;

h. Archaeological sites;

i. Waters of the state, which includes arroyos; or

j. Other areas or features that have been designated for protection due to ecological integrity, balance or character.

3. This section establishes procedures for transferring development rights from sending to receiving parcels, to allow for increased densities in the receiving parcels and reduced densities in the sending parcels, for environmentally sensitive lands, and to allow for the transfer and development of vested projects on land appropriate for such uses.

4.

The TDR system for environmentally sensitive lands is based on the theory of carrying capacity. In other words, a finite amount of development is

permitted in the areas within the sending and receiving parcels. A transfer of development rights does not increase the cumulative density possible in the sending and receiving parcels. The TDR for vested projects is based on the theory that certain projects may have become vested in their development plans, but may be more appropriately located on different property than that for which the initial permit was received.

5.

A special permit application for transfer of development rights shall be subject to the requirements of Chapter 20.04, Article V of this title.

B. Sending Parcels.

1.

Environmentally sensitive lands: Property proposed as a sending parcel may be located in any zoning district within the El Paso city limits and shall meet all of the following criteria:

a. The property proposed as a sending parcel is within an area designated as environmentally sensitive as described in subsection (A)(2);

b. One hundred percent of the development potential of the sending parcel shall be transferred. For purposes of this subsection, "development potential" means the density permitted by the underlying zoning district of the sending parcel;

c. The property is physically and legally developable at the potential of the underlying zoning district, as certified by a registered professional engineer;

d. All of the property in the proposed sending parcel is protected through recording of a conservation easement or otherwise restricted from any future development;

e. Documentation of compliance with the requirements for eligibility as a sending parcel shall be submitted with the application for a special permit requesting a transfer of development right from the sending parcel and an increase in density in the receiving parcel.

2.

Vested Projects. Property proposed as a sending parcel may be located in any zoning district within the El Paso city limits and shall meet all of the following criteria:

a. The project has requested and received a letter of vested rights determination;

b. The vested project is an allowed use within the zoning district on which the receiving parcel is located, or would have been allowed under the ordinances in effect at the time of issuance of the vested determination letter;

c. The vested project as planned, developed, and depicted on applications for all permits, for the receiving parcel substantially conforms to the project for which the vested rights determination letter was granted. Consideration will be given for changes in plans necessitated by the topography or other features of the receiving parcel;

d.

Documentation of compliance with the requirements for eligibility as sending and receiving parcels shall be submitted with the application for a special permit.

e.

Exemption from special permit. A Vested Project will not be required to secure approval of a special permit in accordance with this Section, under the following conditions:

(1) The requestor holds a valid determination of project vesting under Section 1.04.070 of this Code; and

(2) The City has a real property interest in the sending or receiving parcel; and

(3)

Council has determined the following as part of the real property transaction:

(a) That the proposed use being transferred from the sending parcel to the receiving parcel, is identified as the Project in the determination of project vesting; and

(b)

That the proposed use is an appropriate land use on the receiving parcel and is in conformance with the Plan for El Paso; and

(c) That the transfer of land and proposed use of the land is in the best interests of the public health, safety and welfare.

(d) The findings as to the receiving parcel listed above, and the identification of the sending parcel, removing the vested project status, shall be memorialized in a document, approved by the City Attorney and signed by the City Manager, that may be recorded in the county deed records.

Further, a determination of project vesting includes an exemption from special permit requirements if the zoning in place at the time of the first permit application, which resulted in a determination of project vesting, did not require a special permit.

C. Receiving Parcel Designation.

1.

A parcel of land which receives a special permit for development rights to allow increased density pursuant to this section shall be referred to as a "receiving parcel."

2.

No development rights shall be transferred to any parcel of land that is not located in a receiving district and so designated in the ordinance approving the special permit, or unless the receiving parcel is exempt under Section B.2.e.

3.

Environmentally sensitive land: Only property zoned S-D (Special Development), U-P (Union Plaza), PR-I Planned Residential I), PR-II (Planned Residential II), RMU (Residential Mixed Use), and GMU (General Mixed Use) may be designated as receiving districts for purposes of transferring severable development rights from environmentally sensitive lands.

4. Vested Projects: Property in any commercial or the M-1 manufacturing districts may be designated as receiving parcels for transferring development rights and standards in vested projects, subject to City Council review of the special permit, or unless the receiving parcel is exempt under Section B.2.e.

5. The development rights attach to the receiving parcel upon approval of the special permit, if required, or upon the date of closing of the sale or transfer of property if the receiving parcel is exempt under B.2.e., and upon recordation of a conservation easement or other documentation restricting the development of the sending parcel for environmentally sensitive lands, and the inclusion of site plans and other documentation required for vested projects, if required for a special permit, and shall not be subsequently transferred to another property.

D. Special Permit Required.

1. No development rights shall be used on the receiving parcel until a special permit has been submitted by the property owners of both the sending and receiving parcel and approved as provided herein, and in accordance with the notice and hearing requirements of this title.

2. The special permit shall include a finding by the city council that the transfer of development rights will promote the purposes of this section and title.

E.

Evidence of Restriction Required for Development Approval for Environmentally Sensitive TDRs.

F. Restrictions for Development Approval for Vested Projects. As of the effective date of the ordinance for TDR for a vested project, the project at the receiving parcel may be completed in accordance with the regulations that were in effect as of the date of the vested rights determination. Any rights to such regulatory applicability in the sending parcel will terminate as of the effective date.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 18349, §§ 1—5, 4-28-2015)

20.10.700 - TV and radio broadcasting antennae.

A.

In Residential, Apartment and Commercial Zoning Districts. Ground-mounted radio or television broadcasting antenna support structures with antennas and equipment storage facilities shall comply with the following standards:

1. The antenna support base shall be set back one foot for each one foot of height from abutting residential districts, measured from the antenna support base to the property line;

2.

The radio or television broadcasting antenna support structure shall conform with FCC and FAA height regulations within a residential zone;

3. The following must accompany a request for a special permit:

a. A nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) report, in a format acceptable to the FCC,

b. A structural engineering report for the antenna support,

c. A detailed site development plan showing the antenna, supporting structures and appurtenant equipment in relation to the existing surroundings,

d. Verification letters that an FCC application has been submitted and FAA approval has been obtained;

4.

Collocation or installation of additional antennas on an existing antenna support structure shall be permitted after review and approval by the

building official of a structural recertification report, prepared and sealed by a licensed professional engineer, and an updated NIER emissions report;

5.

Increase in elevation of an existing antenna support structure shall be permitted, so long as the setback and maximum height limitations are complied with, after review and approval by the building official of updated structural and NIER emissions reports;

6. Existing nonconforming antenna support structures, unable to comply with current setback limitations shall be prohibited from any increase in elevation.

B.

In manufacturing and Industrial Zoning Districts. Ground-mounted radio or television broadcasting antenna support structures, with appurtenant

antennas and equipment storage facilities shall comply with the following standards:

1. The antenna support base shall be set back from any residential district or residential use one foot for each one foot of height, measured from the antenna support base to the property line. The maximum height limits shall be set by the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) license requirements;

2. The following must accompany a request for a building permit:

a. A detailed plan showing the antenna, support structures, and appurtenant equipment in relation to the existing surroundings including fencing, off-street parking, and access from the antenna support to the nearest public access,

b. A nonionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER) report, in a format acceptable to the FCC,

c. A structural engineering report for the antenna support,

d. Verification letters that an FCC application has been submitted and FAA approval has been obtained;

3.

Collocation or installation of additional antennas on an existing antenna support structure shall be permitted after review and approval by the building official of a structural recertification report prepared and sealed by a licensed, professional engineer;

4. Increase in elevation of an existing antenna support structure shall be permitted, only when the setback limitations are complied with, after review and approval by the building official of updated structural and NIER emissions reports. Existing nonconforming antenna support structures, unable to comply with current setback limitations shall be prohibited from any increase in elevation.

5. The applicant shall provide a six-foot high fence or screening wall around the wall around the base of a self-supporting or guyed mast antenna support, and appurtenant equipment storage facilities, to provide for security. The gate providing access to the antenna support shall remain locked at all times, except when being used for access by maintenance personnel;

6. The access driveway and one off-street parking space, for use by maintenance vehicles, must be paved covered with an alternative all-weather material to provide for a dust-free driving surface as approved by the director of the city development department or other designee of the city manager.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17442, § 29, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17801, § 6, 6-5-2012, eff. 6-11-2012)

20.10.710 - TV and radio receiving antennae.

A permitted accessory use in all districts, residential-type television or radio receiving antennae, roof-mounted, shall not exceed twenty feet in height above the highest point of the roof.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.720 - Unenclosed parking space shelters.

Where specifically listed as a permitted accessory use in a district, unenclosed parking space shelters may be erected as shelters for motor vehicles in conformance with the following:

A. The structure shall not encroach into the required front yard or side street yard;

B. No part of the structure shall be closer than one foot from an adjacent property line within a required side yard or rear yard, except that when the property abuts an R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4 and R-5 zoned property or a single-family attached dwelling in any other zone existing at the time of erection of the parking space shelter, the structure shall not be closer than ten feet from the adjacent property line;

C. The height, measured from the floor of the parking space to the ceiling or lowest clearance, shall not exceed ten feet, and provided that the overall height shall not exceed eleven feet;

D. The structure shall cover only the affected parking space or spaces. It shall not encroach onto the parking lot access driveways and shall not exceed a depth of twenty feet over each parking space;

E. All water runoff shall be controlled to drain into the property on which the structure is located.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.730 - Utility facilities.

Utility facilities shall comply with the following:

A.

Minor Utility Facilities. Minor utility facilities shall be exempt from all requirements of this title and shall be a permitted use in any zoning district of the city, except the natural open space zoning district, where such facilities shall be permitted by special permit in accordance with Section 20.08.

B.

Communication Utility Facilities and Water and Wastewater Utility Facilities. Communication utility facilities and water and wastewater utility facilities shall be permitted uses in any zoning district of the city and shall be exempt from all requirements of this title, except as follows:

1. Facilities with less than or equal to three hundred square feet of floor area:

a. No off-premises advertising shall be permitted;

b. A minimum setback of ten feet from any property line abutting a public or private street right-of-way shall be provided;

2. Facilities with a floor area greater than three hundred square feet:

a. No off-premises advertising shall be permitted;

b. The communication utility facility or water and wastewater utility facility shall be required to meet all requirements of the base zoning district.

3. Communication utility facilities are not permitted in the natural open space zoning district.

C.

Major Utility Facilities. Major utility facilities shall be permitted by special permit in any zone, and shall be required to meet all requirements of the base zoning district.

D.

The requirements of this section shall apply to a public utility or a privately owned and operated utility facility, as otherwise herein defined and regulated, and any other applicable standards contained within this Code.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007; Ord. No. 18531, § 6, 6-28-2016)

20.10.740 - Vehicles.

A. Not more than one commercial vehicle shall be allowed as accessory to a dwelling. Such commercial vehicle shall not have a manufacturer's rated carrying capacity exceeding two tons, shall not exceed twenty-six feet in length, or seven feet eight inches in width or nine feet in height. Except for minor emergency repairs, maintenance and repair of such commercial vehicle on premises, such as would constitute the use of premises for an automotive repair garage, shall not be permitted.

B. No person shall dismantle, repair or otherwise perform any work upon any vehicle, machine, motor, or other similar device, other than to effect minor emergency repairs to a motor vehicle, on any property in an apartment or residential zoning district unless such activity is incidental to a permitted or conditionally permitted use and is conducted within a building.

C. No vehicle (except those upon which minor emergency repairs are being effected), machine, motor, appliance or other similar device from which any part has been removed, or which is inoperable for any reason, including junked or wrecked motor vehicles, shall be stored, maintained or kept on any property in an apartment or residential zoning district as an activity incidental to a permitted or a conditionally permitted use except within a building. (Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.10.750 - Yard, garage or rummage sales.

A. Yard sale, garage sale or rummage sale shall be allowed outdoors for disposal of used household items during the daylight hours, provided that such sales are not held more frequently than three times a calendar year on the same lot of a single-family or two family dwelling, or not held more frequently than six times a calendar year at places of public assembly or at city parks and recreational areas managed by the parks and recreation department, and each time is conducted for no more than two days at a time.

B.

Outdoor rummage sales at places of public assembly and at city parks and recreational areas managed by the parks and recreation department may also include items created and sold by or on behalf of an artist, artisan or crafter.

C. Outdoor rummage sales at places of public assembly and at facilities managed by the parks and recreation department shall comply with the following:

1. Provide off-street parking consisting of one vendor off-street parking space and one customer off-street parking space per table/space. Each off-street parking space shall meet the minimum requirements of Chapter 20.14 (Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations) of this title;

2.

Provide access to the facilities on the property for the disposal of garbage and use of sanitary facilities by all vendors and customers;

3. Provide a ten-foot pedestrian walkway between each row of vendor tables/spaces; and

4. Provide a ten-foot wide access route for emergency services to and within the site area.

D.

No person shall conduct or be a vendor at a yard, garage or rummage sale on the property of a place of public assembly, or at city parks and recreational areas managed by the parks and recreation department, without first obtaining the authorization, permission or a permit from the property owner or managing entity.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17360, § 2, 7-20-2010)

Chapter 20.12 - DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS

Chapter 20.12 - DENSITY AND DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS

20.12.010 - Purpose.

20.12.010 - Purpose.

This chapter is adopted to regulate and restrict the location, height, and size of buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered, the size of yards and open spaces, and the density of population.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.12.020 - Table of density and dimensional standards.

The Table of Density and Dimensional Standards found in Appendix B, adopted in its entirety and incorporated herein by reference, sets forth the regulations for minimum zoning district areas, minimum lot sizes, densities and heights, required setbacks, and other general standards as applicable to specific zoning districts. Where calculation of cumulative yard setbacks is permitted, all the individual minimum yard requirements (front, rear and side) as well as the minimum cumulative requirements must be satisfied. The minimum yards, height limits and open spaces, including lot areas required by this chapter, shall not be encroached upon or considered as required yard or open space for any other building, nor shall any lot area or lot dimension be reduced below the requirements of this ordinance, except as hereinafter provided. Additional development standards for specific uses and special purpose districts are also found in Chapter 20.10 of this title. In case of a conflict, the more restrictive standard shall apply.

(Ord. 16761 § 1 (part), 2007; Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.12.030 - Supplemental height regulations.

20.12.030 - Supplemental height regulations.

Height regulations as set forth in the Table of Density and Dimensional Standards — Appendix B, may be modified as follows:

A.

No new building may be erected or existing building increased in height in such a manner as to shade a solar heating or power facility licensed in the following manner:

1. Where any building installs a heating, cooling or power system using sunlight as a power source sufficient to supply ten percent or more of the building's total energy requirement, the owner of the building may apply to the building official for a license for the system which the building official shall issue once satisfied that the system does supply the above minimum energy requirements.

2. After issuance of the license, no building in adjacent areas may be erected to a height that will cast a shadow on the solar receiver components so licensed. In determining the permitted heights, the December 22nd arc and declination of the sun shall be used. Location of licensed solar power systems shall be shown on the zoning district maps.

B. Public, semipublic or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions, or schools when permitted in a district, may be erected to a height not exceeding one hundred feet, and churches and temples may be erected to a height not exceeding seventy-five feet if the building is set back from each yard line at least one foot for each foot of additional building height above the height limit otherwise provided in the zoning district in which the building is located.

C.

Church spires, belfries, monuments, tanks, water and fire towers, windmills, stage towers or scenery lofts, cooling towers, ornamental towers and spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads, stacks, conveyors and flagpoles may exceed height limits if approved by the building official.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.12.040 - Yards.

A.

Yards Generally. More than one principal building may be located on a lot in the following instances, however, the provision of these exceptions shall not be construed to allow any building to be constructed outside the buildable area of the lot:

1. Institutional buildings;

2. Public or semipublic buildings;

3. Multifamily dwellings or groups of single-family attached buildings;

4. Commercial or industrial buildings;

5. Homes for the elderly.

B.

Front yard regulations may be modified as follows:

1. Where the frontage of a parcel of land is divided among districts with different front yards, the deepest front yard requirement shall apply to the entire frontage;

2.

Where forty percent or more of the lot frontage is occupied by two or more buildings, then the required front yard for a new structure is established in the following manner, except that a front yard in excess of district regulations shall not be required:

a. Where the building farthermost from the street provides a front yard not more than ten feet deeper than the building closest to the street, then the front yard for the frontage is and remains an average of the then existing front yards.

b. Where subsection a does not apply and a lot is within one hundred feet of a building on each side, then the front yard is a line drawn from the closest front corners of these two adjacent buildings.

c. Where neither subsection a or b apply and the lot is within one hundred feet of an existing building on one side only, then the front yard is the same as that of the existing adjacent building.

d. The above calculations shall only apply to those buildings providing the required rear yard;

3.

Gasoline and diesel or other fueling pump and pump islands may occupy required yards; provided, however, that they are not less than twelve feet from all lot lines. A freestanding canopy with support columns centered on the pump or pump island may encroach up to fifteen feet into the required front yard; provided, that it shall not extend closer than two feet to any lot line;

4.

On a dwelling or apartment site an unenclosed porch, carport or entranceway patio with a wall up to six feet high, each not more than one hundred

fifty square feet in floor area may extend not more than ten feet into a required front yard. Chimney backs, bay windows, eaves and cornices may extend not more than thirty inches into the required front yard except that cornices and eaves of the main building may extend not more than four feet into the front yard;

5. For apartment houses and other nonresidential structures only, a canopy or other sunshade over a walkway shall be permitted in the front yard or any yard abutting a street, even if wholly supported by attachment to the main structure, providing such canopy or sunshade is not otherwise enclosed. Columns or tiedown struts, if used, shall not be greater than three inches in diameter, and shall not be spaced closer than six feet apart on either side of the walkway. The canopy or sunshade may extend to within two feet of the property line.

D. Right-of-Way Dedication Requirements. Whenever a new nonresidential building is erected or an existing residential building converted to a nonresidential use, no building or occupancy permit is to be issued until a determination is made by the traffic engineer as to the need for dedication of additional right-of-way in accordance with state law. If it is determined that additional right-of-way is needed, such shall be dedicated to public use prior to issuance of any building or occupancy permit.

E. Side and rear yard regulations may be modified as follows:

1. For residential buildings existing on or before August 1, 1979, carports may extend up to three feet into a required side yard, but only when screened by a masonry wall not less than five feet in height erected along the lot line. Carports that extend into the required side yard shall not be enclosed;

2. Sills, eaves, belt courses, wing-walls at heights above six feet, window air conditioning units, chimney backs, bay windows, cornices and ornamental

features may project a distance not to exceed twenty-four inches into a required side yard, and thirty inches into a required rear yard;

3.

Open fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies opening from fire towers, and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues into a rear yard may project into a required yard for a distance of not more than three and one-half feet, when placed so as to not obstruct light and ventilation;

4. Open, unenclosed porches that do not exceed one hundred eighty square feet in area may extend twelve feet into a required rear yard;

5. Terraces which do not extend above the ground level and that do not exceed one hundred fifty square feet of floor area, with a wall up to six feet in height may project five feet into a required yard, provided these projections be located at least two feet from the adjacent lot line;

6. Where an industrial tract abuts railroad property containing a spur track on the rear or side property line, a railroad loading dock, or the building itself, may extend to the property line for the purpose of receiving service from the railroad spur track;

7. In the R-1, R-2 or R-2A districts where a residential property abuts a dedicated public right-of-way, other than a street right-of-way, owned by the city, the building may extend into the side yard to within five feet of the property line.

F. Side street yard regulations may be modified as follows:

1. For residential buildings existing on or before August 1, 1979, carports may extend to five feet into a required side street yard. Carports that extend into the required side street yard shall not be enclosed;

2. Sills, eaves, belt courses, wing-walls at heights above six feet, window air conditioning units, chimney backs, bay windows, cornices and ornamental features may project a distance not to exceed twenty-four inches into a required side street yard;

3. Accessory structures may extend up to five feet into a required side street yard.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.12.050 - Supplemental density regulations.

Density regulations may be modified in the following instances:

A. Lot area per unit requirements shall not apply to dormitories, fraternities, sororities, nursing homes or other similar group quarters where no cooking facilities are provided in individual rooms or apartments;

B. In any special use permit for a planned residential development, and in any instance where site plan approval is required in an RMH, PMD, SD, PR-I, PR-II or A-4 district for residential use, density regulations may be modified as follows:

The maximum number of permitted dwelling units as required in the district regulations may be increased:

1. By five percent if twenty-five percent or more of the site is used for common open space;

2. By five percent if one square foot or more of recreation area is provided for every five square feet of residential floor space; balconies, patios, atriums and clubrooms may be counted as recreation area;

3. By five percent if one-half or more of the required parking is enclosed;

au

4. By five percent if a panoramic view is provided for the living room of seventy-five percent or more of the dwelling units;

5. By five percent if ten percent or more of the energy use is to be from solar power;

6. By five percent if individual units are soundproofed in accordance with an impact noise rating (I.N.R.) of five or more as described in the publication "A Guide to Airborne, Impact, and Structure Borne Noise-Control in Multifamily Dwellings" by Berendt, Winzer, and Burroughs, US Department of Housing and Urban Development, US Printing Office 1967;

7. By five percent if the area devoted to landscape planting is in excess of thirty-five percent of the site area.

The increase in permitted density resulting from application of the provisions of this subsection shall be limited to a total of thirty-five percent;

C. Where the total floor area of a building is limited by a floor area ratio, the maximum floor area may be increased by four square feet of additional floor area for each square foot of landscaped open space on the lot above the minimum required by this Code. The maximum floor area may be increased by an additional one percent for each ten percent of the building's energy requirement that is provided by solar power.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.12.060 - Vision clearance at intersections.

20.12.060 - Vision clearance at intersections.

On any corner lot, within that area of a triangle (twenty-foot triangle) formed by the intersecting property lines and a diagonal line joining the property lines at points twenty feet from their intersection, the following conditions shall apply in any front yard, rear yard or both yards:

A.

It is unlawful for any person to place, construct or reconstruct any building or structure, including a fence or wall, on a corner lot if the top of such building or structure is more than three feet above the level of the centerline of the nearest abutting street, and such building or structure is within the above twenty-foot triangle; provided, this subsection shall not apply to a retaining wall necessary for the support of the lot, nor to a wall of a building when the building legally extends into such triangle;

B. It is unlawful for any person to locate motor vehicles or motor vehicle parking spaces on a corner lot if the top of any motor vehicle parked there is more than three feet above the level of the centerline of the nearest abutting street, and such motor vehicles or motor vehicle parking space is within the above twenty-foot triangle;

C. Where special conditions exist, or where practical difficulties in the development and adequate use of land would result from the literal enforcement of the terms of this section, the traffic engineer is authorized to grant a modification of the requirements set forth in this section; provided, that any such modifications so granted shall be in harmony with the general intent of this section, and consistent with the public interest, safety and general welfare. Approval of such modifications shall be in writing and shall set forth the specific details, special circumstances and/or conditions of the approval.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

Chapter 20.14 - OFF-STREET PARKING, LOADING AND STORAGE STANDARDS

Article I. - Vehicular Parking

20.14.010 - Purpose.

The requirements in this chapter are intended to provide reasonable standards for the provision of off-street parking of motor vehicles, not including bicycles, trucks with three axles or more, semi-trailer trucks and cabs, and the storage of vehicles for sale. These standards are designed to provide compliance with the El Paso comprehensive plan and to achieve the following objectives:

A. Regulate off-street parking requirements according to the use of the facility;

B. Expand tabular display of uses and parking needs;

C. Clarify and simplify required parking calculations;

D. Provide for shared parking (non-simultaneous) arrangements.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.14.020 - Scope.

A. Applicability. The off-street parking requirements of this chapter shall be applicable to all uses, except as modified herein, including:

1. New development, including new buildings or facilities;

2. Addition to or enlargement of an existing building or facility which exceeds fifty percent of the original square footage;

3. Change of use of an existing facility;

4. Change of use and hours of operation of the property generating the parking need or the shared parking property of a shared parking arrangement.

B. Location of Spaces. The location, design and number of required off-street parking spaces shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. Except as authorized by administrative review in certain districts or as permitted under the shared parking provisions of this chapter, off-street parking required by this chapter shall be located on the same lot as the use generating the parking need. Parking spaces provided in excess of the required parking spaces shall also comply with the requirements of this chapter.

C. Responsibility for and Use of Spaces. The provision and maintenance of off-street parking shall be the responsibility of the owner of the use, building, structure and/or property on which the use generating the parking need is located. Required parking spaces shall be utilized only for the parking of motor vehicles, and shall not be utilized for another use or purpose for the duration of the use requiring such off-street parking. Required parking spaces shall not be utilized for repair, storage, dismantling or servicing of vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies. Required parking spaces shall not be rented or leased to persons other than those for whom the parking is intended. The number, design or function of required off-street parking spaces shall not be altered or reduced in a manner that violates the requirements of this chapter.

D. Use of excess spaces. Where the number of off-street parking spaces provided at a site exceeds the maximum number of off-street parking spaces allowed under the Table of Parking Requirements and Standards, the excess parking spaces may be utilized for another permitted use or purpose in accordance with this chapter, including shared parking arrangements, or agreed to off-street parking for another use. Excess parking spaces for new development shall be constructed and landscaped in accordance with the standards of this chapter.

E. Failure to maintain required number of spaces. Failure to maintain the minimum required number of off-street parking spaces may, after written notice to the owner or operator, result in the revocation of the certificate of occupancy for the building or facility in addition to other penalties as described in Chapter 20.04.

F. Storage of Other Types of Vehicles. The parking requirements in this chapter are in addition to required space for storage of trucks, campers, recreation vehicles, or other similar vehicles used in connection with any use.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17560, § 1, 5-17-2011; Ord. No. 17869, § 1, 9-18-2012)

20.14.030 - Definitions.

The following definitions are specific to this chapter and control if in conflict with other provisions of this Code:

A. Base Course/Sub-Grade. A minimum four-inch thick layer of chosen and compacted soil below the wearing surface layer of the parking area whether asphalt, concrete, screenings, gravel, or other approved material. The base course layer should be a course mixture with aggregate no larger than three inches in diameter unless otherwise designed by a professional engineer. A gravel/screening-leveling course may be used atop a rocky compacted and/or semi-cemented conglomerate base course/sub-grade;

B. Desilting Area. Where on-site ponding is not provided, for the purposes of gravel/screening surfaces desilting areas are defined as depressions incorporated into the parking or landscaping upstream of any discharge onto public streets for the purpose of desilting and stilling runoff. Desilting basins shall have a minimum capacity of 0.05 cubic feet per square foot of gravel parking surface (five CF of desilting per one hundred SF parking) unless otherwise designed by a professional engineer and approved by the city engineer.

Example: 1 parking space 9′ x 20′ = 180 SF x 0.05 = 9 CF desilting basin

Use: 2 FT x 3 FT x 1.5 FT deep or triangular swale

(Entire site may have other requirements)

C. Gravel/Screenings. A coarse aggregate mixture of pebbles and/or rock fragments coarser than sand with fifty percent volume greater than or equal to one-half inch;

D.

Hard Surface. For the purposes of gravel/screenings surfaces, hard surfaced areas are defined as any rigid durable surface such as concrete, asphalt, pavers, or composite surface which may include the incorporating of strip drains, drain fields, spacers between pavers, etc., for permeable qualities (porous, allowing in this case for water to pass through) and stormwater harvesting;

E. Motor Vehicle. For the purposes of this chapter, a motor vehicle is defined as a passenger vehicle or light truck with a carrying capacity rated at one ton or less intended for highway use;

F. On-Site Ponding. On-site ponding is defined as privately maintained ponding areas or as storm drainage retained on-site as inherent in low lying areas such as but not limited to valley areas of the city. For the purposes of gravel/screening surfaces, for nonresidential sites, the defined pond shall be designed for a fifty-year storm, however the rest of the unoccupied area (excluding enclosed buildings) shall be designed to contain a one hundred year storm, with no additional capacity for emergency, silt, or freeboard storage required, and fencing requirements if any are to be determined by a professional engineer based on the conditions and design of the ponding area;

G. Utility Facility. Equipment, mains, lines, and required infrastructure and appurtenances for the transmission of power, fuel, water, sanitary sewer, or communication not including office and administrative building uses.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.14.040 - Design and construction.

Required parking spaces shall conform to the following:

A.

Minimum Dimensions and Arrangement. Except for compact vehicle spaces, all spaces shall have minimum dimensions of nine feet in width, eighteen feet in length, and six feet and eight inches of unobstructed height, exclusive of access or maneuvering area, ramps, and other appurtenances, except parking spaces reserved for the use of persons with disabilities shall comply with the building code, Chapter 18.08. Parking spaces arranged in tandem and including not more than two spaces in a row shall be permitted for single or two-family detached or single or two-family attached dwelling units. No portion of an off-street parking space shall encroach onto a public right-of-way.

B. Compact Vehicle Spaces Permitted. Where the number of required off-street parking spaces for permitted uses and accessory uses, if any, exceeds thirty spaces, no more than twenty percent of the required spaces may be reserved for compact vehicle parking. Compact vehicle parking spaces shall be a minimum of eight feet in width, sixteen feet in length and six feet and eight inches of unobstructed height for each space and shall be designated for the exclusive use by compact cars only. Spaces reserved for compact vehicles shall be so indicated by appropriate signage with a minimum of six- inch high letters provided by the owner or operator. The owner and operator shall be responsible for preventing the unauthorized use of compact vehicle parking spaces by vehicles other than compact vehicles that extend beyond the dimension of the space thereby creating a safety hazard.

C. Angle Parking Dimensions. Minimum aisle widths and space depths shall be per table, Section 20.14.040(F) and shall be based upon the degree of the angle of the parking. (Space length is the length of the parking space measured parallel with the parking space. Space depth is the projected depth of the parking space measured perpendicular to the aisle providing access to that space.)

D.

Access to lots. Access to off-street parking spaces shall be provided by aisles or driveways complying with Title 19 (Subdivisions), Title 13 (Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places), and this chapter. An aisle is the traveled path providing vehicular access to two or more parking spaces. Access shall be subject to approval by the traffic engineer and shall be arranged to minimize turning movements onto and from the public right-of-way. Aisles and driveways providing access to off-street parking spaces shall connect to a dedicated public or private street or easement. Property zoned R, A, or RMU may not be used for access to a parking area on a separate site for a use that is not permitted in the R, A or RMU zone.

E.

Acceptable surfaces. Surfacing of required off-street parking spaces shall be with asphalt paving, brick, brick pavers, concrete, concrete pavers or other

comparable dust-free surfacing subject to the approval of the director of the city development department or other designee of the city manager. Gravel screening may be an acceptable surface for required parking spaces provided that it complies with provisions of Section 20.14.080 and Appendix C. Surfaces shall be maintained in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash and debris.

F. Table.

Parking Space Dimensions

[Regular Size Autos and Light Trucks]

Angle Stall Aisle Interlock Overhang Depth Width Reduction 45 degrees 19′ — 1″ 13′ — 0″ 2′ — 4″ 2′ — 1″ 60 degrees 19′ — 6″ 16′ — 0″ 1′ — 8″ 2′ — 7″ 75 degrees 19′ — 9″ 20′ — 0″ 1′ 2′ — 11″ 90 degrees 18′ — 0″ 24′ — 0″ 0′ - 0″ 3′ — 0″

Parking Space Dimensions

[Compact Size Vehicles]

Angle Stall Aisle Interlock Overhang Depth Width Reduction 45 degrees 15′ — 3″ 11′ — 6″ 2′ — 0″ 1′ — 5″ 60 degrees 16′ — 4″ 13′ — 4″ 1′ — 5″ 1′ — 9″ 75 degrees 16′ — 6″ 16′ — 0″ .9′ 1′ — 11″ 90 degrees 16′ — 0″ 20′ — 0″ 0′ - 0″ 2′ — 0″

G.

Stormwater drainage. Drainage of stormwater from required off-street parking spaces and parking lots shall conform to good engineering practices and shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer or other designee of the city manager.

H. Lighting. Required off-street parking spaces or parking lots used during hours of darkness shall be provided with adequate lighting. Lighting shall comply with Title 18.

I. Signage. Signs complying with the requirements of Chapter 20.18 (Sign Regulations) may be provided at a parking lot describing the ownership of the lot, its permitted use(s) and the charges or rates for the use of the parking lot, ingress and egress drives, etc.

J. Barriers to Encroachment. Barriers shall be provided to prevent a motor vehicle using a parking space or parking lot from encroaching upon the public right-of-way, including sidewalks. Barriers shall be a minimum of six inches in height, of sufficient length, and located to prevent any portion of the motor vehicle from encroaching. Barriers shall be of an approved design, anchored properly, and fabricated of concrete, asphalt or other approved material.

K. Landscaping and Screening. Parking areas shall be screened in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 20.16 (Screening and Fencing Regulations). Parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the requirements of this Code.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17442, § 32, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17801, § 7, 6-5-2012, eff. 6-11-2012)

20.14.050 - Parking requirements and standards.

A. Parking. Table of Parking Requirements and Standards, subsection C. of this title establishes the minimum and maximum number of motor vehicle parking spaces unless otherwise stated, and minimum bicycle parking spaces required for the uses indicated. The city manager or designee shall be authorized to interpret and establish the minimum and maximum parking regulations for uses not shown in the Table of Parking Requirements and Standards, subsection C.

B.

Method of computation. Calculations to compute the maximum number of required parking spaces shall be based upon the following formulae:

1. Where the calculation of the required parking results in fractions of spaces, the number of spaces shall be rounded to the next highest whole number for fractions of 0.5 or greater.

2.

For new building(s) or development with more than one use, the parking maximum shall be determined by the sum of the number of parking spaces

allowed for each individual use computed separately. A shared parking arrangement may be approved for a mixed use building, shopping center, or facility where the uses have different hours of operation or parking usage, in which case the parking requirement shall be based upon the calculation for the individual use or group of simultaneous uses that result in the largest number of off-street parking spaces required.

3. For new building(s) or development with both permitted uses and accessory uses, the parking maximum shall be determined by the sum of the maximum number of parking spaces allowed for each individual use, permitted or accessory, computed separately. A shared parking arrangement may be approved for a site where the permitted uses have different hours of operation or parking usage from those of the accessory uses, in which case the parking requirement shall be based upon the calculation for the individual permitted use or group of simultaneous permitted uses that results in the largest number of off-street parking spaces required.

4. Parking maximums for an addition to or enlargement of an existing building or facility shall be calculated on the basis of the addition or enlargement and shall be added to the parking maximum for the existing building or facility prior to the expansion. In the event the existing parking provided for the existing building or facility is nonconforming with the requirements of this chapter, refer to Chapter 20.22 (Nonconforming Situations).

5.

For a change of use(s) of an existing building or facility, or a portion thereof, the parking requirements shall be calculated on the basis of the sum of the current code required parking as applied to the changed use(s), plus the prior code requirements applied to the unchanged portion(s) of the existing building or facility; or on the basis of the current code for the entire building or facility, whichever is less.

6.

Where the parking calculation is determined by the gross floor area (GFA) of the building or facility, the GFA shall be measured to the exterior of the walls for every occupied floor. GFA of a building or facility shall not include areas used solely for off-street parking of motor vehicles or bicycles and associated driveways, and shall not include areas reserved for off-street loading berths.

7. Where the parking calculation is determined by the number of seats or the number of occupants of a building or facility, the occupant load shall be per Title 18, Building and Construction, Chapter 18.08.

8. The GFA of a restaurant, nightclub, bar or cocktail lounge with an outdoor seating area shall also include the gross floor area of such outdoor seating area.

9.

The GFA of a shopping center or other similar uses shall be based upon the entire shopping center, including the gross floor area of covered atrium and mall areas. The GFA of a shopping center shall not include the open well areas of the upper levels of a multi-story atrium or mall.

10.

Up to five percent of the minimum required vehicular parking spaces may be substituted with motorcycle parking spaces at the rate of one vehicular parking space for each three-motorcycle parking spaces provided. Motorcycle parking spaces shall be a minimum of seventy-five inches by thirty inches each exclusive of access aisles.

C.

Table of Parking Requirements and Standards. The parking standards and requirements are established in the Parking Requirements and Standards Table, located in Appendix C, adopted in its entirety and incorporated herein by reference, and unless otherwise provided for herein, all parking shall comply with the parking table.

D.

Off-street parking. Off-street parking regulations shall not apply to properties in the Improvement District No. 3, established by Ordinance 736 and dated April 3, 1952. The boundaries of Improvement District No. 3 shall also include all property designated under the Downtown 2015 Plan.

E. Excess parking. Excess parking shall be subject to the following requirement:

1. In addition to the landscape requirements of Title 18.46 (Landscape), one tree for every five spaces in excess of the maximum parking requirement shall be required and shall be placed within the entire parking area to provide for even canopy coverage or along the parkway to create a visual buffer between the parking area and the street.

(Ord. 16761 § 1 (part) Exh. B, 2007; Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17262, § 1, 1-5-2010; Ord. No. 17442, § 33, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17560, § 2, 5-17-2011)

20.14.060 - Shared parking.

A. Submission of request. Whenever a shared parking arrangement is proposed to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the shared parking arrangement shall be subject to the prior approval of the city manager or designee and shall not require a special permit for off-site, off-street parking. To obtain approval of a shared parking arrangement, the owner or operator of the property on which the parking need is generated shall submit an application containing the following information to the city manager or designee. The fee for processing the application shall be as set by city council resolution.

1. The maximum number of parking spaces, in accordance with this chapter, for the use(s) at the property generating the parking need, the number of parking spaces provided, and the hours of operation of the use(s).

2. The maximum number of parking spaces, in accordance with this chapter, for the use(s) at the shared parking property, the number of parking spaces provided, and the hours of operation of the use(s).

B.

Conditions for approval. A shared parking arrangement shall be approved only when the arrangement meets all of the following conditions:

1. The parking arrangement complies with this chapter;

2. The owner or operator demonstrates that the use(s) of the property generating the parking need and the use(s) of the shared parking property are non-simultaneous or that the proposed shared parking spaces are in excess of the parking required for the use(s) of the shared parking property, or a combination of each option;

3. The shared parking property is within three hundred feet of the property generating the parking need and the access is provided between the two properties;

The parking area is compatible with the general development of the neighborhood and does not adversely affect the use of adjacent properties; and

4.

4. The parking area is compatible with the general development of the neighborhood and does not adversely affect the use of adjacent properties; and

5. The required information has been satisfactorily submitted.

C.

Modification of arrangement. A modification of a shared parking arrangement shall be subject to the same standards for review and approval by the city manager or designee as the original arrangement.

D.

Termination of arrangement. The termination of a shared parking arrangement agreement may, after written notice to the owner or operator, result in the revocation of the certificate of occupancy for the building or facility of the property generating the parking need and which does not meet the minimum parking regulations, in addition to other penalties as described in this title.

E. Sharing with city owned property. A shared parking arrangement in which the city is the owner of the shared parking property shall be permitted provided the owner complies with all of the requirements of this section, and additionally obtains a lease from the city for such use of city property.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17442, § 34, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17560, § 3, 5-17-2011)

20.14.070 - Parking reductions.

The amount of off-street parking required for a specific use may be reduced below the minimum required in Section 20.14.050 C., if a special permit is approved by city council, as provided in this section:

A.

Existing development. Up to a one hundred percent reduction for a use involving an existing structure(s) located within an older neighborhood of the city that is proposed through the rehabilitation, alteration or expansion of the existing structure(s). The applicant shall satisfactorily demonstrate compliance with all of the following conditions:

1. That the structure(s) is located in an older neighborhood of the city that has been legally subdivided and developed for at least thirty years;

2. That the structure(s) does not extend into an area within the property which was previously used to accommodate off-street parking;

3.

That the off-street parking required for the proposed use of the structure(s) cannot be reasonably accommodated on the property due to the building coverage, whether due to the existing structure or due to a proposed expansion of the existing structure; and

4. That no vacant areas exist within three hundred feet of the property where the proposed use is to be located that can be reasonably developed to accommodate the off-street parking requirements.

B.

New Development in Redevelopment Areas. Up to a one hundred percent reduction for a use involving the new construction of a structure(s) that is proposed as a redevelopment project located within a redevelopment area or transit oriented development corridor of the city. The applicant shall satisfactorily demonstrate compliance with all of the following conditions:

1. That the structure(s) is located within one of the following redevelopment areas: the downtown area (defined as the area between the Union Depot, Paisano Drive, St. Vrain Street, Olive Street, St. Vrain Street, the southern boundary of the Southern Pacific RR Reservation, Campbell Street and Interstate 10), the South El Paso area (defined as the area south of Paisano Drive, and lying between Santa Fe Street and Cotton Street), and any other redevelopment area or transit oriented development corridor as may be recommended by the city plan commission and approved by the city council;

2.

That the proposed building coverage on the lot is necessary for the proposed use, both in design and function necessitating the reduction; and

3. That no vacant areas exist within three hundred feet of the property where the proposed use is to be located that can be reasonably developed to accommodate the off-street parking requirements.

C.

Parking Reduction Application Procedures. An applicant requesting consideration of a parking reduction shall comply with all of the following:

1. A special permit application for an off-street parking reduction shall not be construed as an automatic approval by the city and shall require the review and approval of the city council as set forth herein;

2. The applicant shall submit adequate documentation to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section. City council shall make the final determination following a recommendation of the city plan commission and may impose conditions and safeguards necessary to protect the public welfare and to conserve and protect property;

3. A completed special permit application for an off-street parking reduction shall be submitted to the planning official, and shall be accompanied with all of the following:

a. One copy of a completed application signed by the property owner(s), and

b. Eight copies of a detailed site plan of the subject property and all properties within three hundred feet adjoining the subject property, drawn to scale and showing the following:

i. Legal description,

ii. Property lines with dimensions,

iii. Location and arrangement of existing and proposed structures,

iv.

Location and arrangement of existing and proposed off-street parking areas,

v. Location and arrangement of existing and proposed on-street parking areas within a three hundred radius from the perimeter of the lot of the facility requesting the reduction,

vi. Calculation of the number of minimum off-street parking spaces for the existing and proposed use(s) of the property.

vii. Off-street loading and unloading berths, where applicable,

viii.

Off-street parking spaces and driveways not subject to reduction, if applicable,

ix.

Streets abutting the property, including the location and dimensions of sidewalks, and

x. Areas within the property where landscaping is provided, if any,

c.

One copy of a parking reduction impact study or of the letter from the city engineer waiving the parking reduction impact study, and

d. One copy of a letter from the Director of Sun Metro indicating that the main entrance to the property is within one thousand feet of a mass transit system route,

e. One copy of a proof of ownership document, and

f. One copy of a current tax certificate sealed and having the signature of the city tax assessor/collector, for each parcel of property described in the application for an off-street parking reduction;

4.

An off-street parking reduction granted pursuant to this section shall be particular to the use for which it was granted. A change in use that results in a change of parking requirements or hours of operation shall automatically terminate the off-street parking reduction;

5.

Structure(s) for which an off-street parking reduction has been granted shall be in accordance with all other applicable codes;

6.

An application for an off-street parking reduction shall demonstrate that all of the following circumstances apply:

a. That a reduction in the off-street parking requirement will not result in the unreasonable parking or loading of vehicles on public streets in such a manner as to interfere with the free flow of traffic on the streets, as demonstrated by findings of a parking reduction impact study where required by the city engineer. A parking reduction impact study, where required, shall be prepared in accordance with the standards required by the city engineer,

b. That a reduction in the off-street parking requirement will not create a safety hazard or other condition inconsistent with the objectives of this title,

c.

That the property where the proposed use is to be located has sidewalks and the main entrance is within one thousand feet of a mass transit system route, as

determined by the director of Sun Metro, and

d. That off-street parking not subject to a reduction shall comply with all other city ordinances governing off-street parking, including accessibility for the disabled.

D. Administrative parking reductions.

1. The zoning administrator may approve up to a ten percent parking reduction below the minimum required for a use involving an existing building(s) or structure(s) for applicants meeting the requirements specified in this section. The zoning administrator must be satisfied that the approval of a reduction will substantially serve the public convenience and welfare and will not substantially injure the neighboring property.

2.

An applicant requesting a reduction under this section must submit a written application and shall satisfactorily demonstrate compliance with all of the following conditions:

a. That the required minimum number of off-street parking spaces cannot be reasonably accommodated on the property involved; and

b.

That the request for the reduction is due to a change in use; and,

c. That the reduction of the required minimum parking spaces is for an existing building(s) or structure(s); and

d. That the reduction of the required minimum parking spaces is not for a new structure(s) or building(s) or due to the expansion of an existing structure(s) or building(s); and

e.

That the applicant provides letters from the abutting property owners stating that the abutting property owners do not object to the parking

reduction;

3.

As part of the review process, the traffic engineer shall review the request to determine the impact on the surrounding properties and shall

recommend approval or denial of the request. If the city traffic engineer recommends denial, the applicant shall be provided with the reasons for denial.

4. Upon a recommendation for approval from the city traffic engineer, the zoning administrator shall determine if all other provisions of this section have been satisfied and approve or deny the request for a parking reduction. If necessary to reduce the impact to neighboring property, the zoning administrator may impose additional requirements, such as landscaping or screening, as a condition of approval.

5.

If the zoning administrator denies the request, the property owner may appeal the decision to the zoning board of adjustment.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17261, § 1, 1-5-2010; Ord. No. 17442, § 35, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17560, §§ 4—9, 5-17-2011)

20.14.080 - Gravel/screening surface parking.

A. Allowed uses.

1.

Office, educational or institutional (less than or equal to five thousand sf building).

a. Gravel/screenings surfaced parking areas may be incorporated for the required parking reserved for use by employees and staff of in-store retail or professional offices, and for required parking where on-site ponding (see Section 20.14.080 C.4.) or permanent desilting basins are provided. In no case shall gravel/screening parking exceed fifty percent of the total required parking.

b. The perimeter of any gravel or screenings parking and drives areas shall be delineated by edging, curbing, abutting hard surfaces or other method as approved by the director of the city development department or other designee of the city manager; and signage shall be installed indicating "Parking For Employees, Staff, and/or Overflow Parking Only."

2.

Office, educational or institutional (greater than five thousand sf building).

a.

Gravel or screenings surfaced parking may be incorporated for parking in excess of the required parking only.

b. The perimeter of any gravel or screenings parking and drives areas shall be delineated by edging, curbing, abutting hard surfaces or other method as approved by the director of the city development department or other designee of the city manager; and signage shall be installed indicating "Overflow Parking Only."

c. All access drives to required parking shall be hard surfaced.

3.

Commercial/manufacturing/warehousing/ storage/construction yards/ high traffic uses.

a. Gravel/screenings surfaces may be incorporated for parking in excess of the required parking, for employee parking, for the storage users of truck trailers, storage containers, equipment, supplies, materials, motor vehicles or recreational vehicles which are part of the business function of the facility or site; including transport drop-offs and stock-in-trade.

b. All required parking for visitors, customers, employees, or patrons shall be hard surfaced.

c. The perimeter of any gravel or screenings parking and drives areas shall be delineated by edging, curbing, abutting hard surfaces or other method as approved by the director of the city development department or other designee of the city manager; and signage shall be installed indicating "Overflow Parking Only" or as appropriate.

d. All access drives to required parking shall be hard surfaced.

e. All loading docks and all other loading areas shall be hard surfaced.

4.

Recreation, amusement and entertainment.

a. For outdoor facilities, gravel/screenings surfaces may be incorporated for required parking in accordance with the attached table (Parking Table, Appendix C). For indoor facilities, gravel surface parking areas may be incorporated for parking in excess of the required parking, and for required parking where on-site ponding or permanent desilting basins are provided.

b. Gravel/screenings surfaces may be incorporated for parking in excess of the required parking and for the storage of truck trailers, storage containers, equipment, supplies, materials, recreational vehicles that are part of the function of the facility.

c. The perimeter of any gravel or screenings parking and drives areas shall be delineated by edging, curbing, abutting hard surface or other method as approved by the director of the city development department or other designee of the city manager.

d. All access drives to required hard surfaced parking shall be hard surfaced.

5. Temporary Uses.

a. Gravel/screenings surfaces may be incorporated for all required parking subject to review, approval, and conditions by the director of the city development department or other designee of the city manager.

b. Temporary uses with no parking requirements (i.e., construction areas, etc.) are exempt from parking surface requirements.

c.

The perimeter of any gravel or screenings parking and drive areas shall be delineated by edging, curbing, or abutting hard surface or other method as approved by the director of the city development department or other designee of the city manager.

6.

Utility, miscellaneous and governmental facilities.

a. Gravel/screenings surfaces may be incorporated for required and/or excess parking subject to review, approval, and conditions by the director of the city development department or other designee of the city manager.

b. Temporary uses with no parking requirements (construction areas, etc.) are exempt from parking surface requirements.

c. Any gravel or screenings parking areas shall be delineated by edging, curbing, or abutting hard surface or other method as approved by the director of the city development department or other designee of the city manager.

7.

Agricultural and related uses. Gravel/screenings surfaces may be incorporated for all required parking including truck trailers, storage containers, equipment, supplies, materials, recreational vehicles which is part of the business function of the facility as well as personal vehicles of the living quarters on the premises, and for parking in excess of the required parking.

8. Residential.

a. Gravel/screenings surfaces may be incorporated for:

i. Required parking located at a distance no less than twenty feet from the front property line;

ii. For required parking where on-site ponding (see Section 20.14.080(C)(4)) or permanent desilting basins are provided for the surface area of the gravel/screening parking area; and

iii. For all parking in excess of the required parking within side and rear yards.

b. The perimeter of any gravel or screenings parking areas shall be delineated by edging, curbing, abutting hard surfaces or other method as approved by the director of the city development department or other designee of the city manager.

B. Non-allowed uses and restrictions.

1.

Gravel/screenings surfaces shall not be incorporated for either required or excess parking for motor vehicle sales except as allowed in other sections of this chapter, for repair or dismantling uses, for storage of used drive train components other than tires, wheels or drive shafts, or for fueling or lubricating bays.

2.

Gravel/screenings surfaces shall not be incorporated for either required or excess parking for hospital or medical treatment uses with buildings greater than or equal to five thousand square feet.

3.

Gravel/screenings surfaces may be not be incorporated for either required or excess parking in excess of ninety-nine spaces.

au FW

4. No authorizations herein shall supersede state or federal requirements, restrictions, rules, or regulations.

No parking is allowed on top of landscaping or areas not specifically designated for parking.

5.

6. Parking surfaces with more than five parking spaces shall be paved or uniformly covered with gravel. This provision shall not apply to temporary parking lots defined as lots used for less than one month, after which access is prohibited. Such temporary lots shall be required to apply water or suitable oil or chemical.

C. General requirements for all allowed uses.

1.

All driveway aprons from public streets to any gravel/screenings surfaced areas shall be concrete, asphalt (where applicable), or composite thereof. Driveway apron shall extend a minimum of twenty feet from the property line.

2. Where possible, gravel/screenings surfaced parking areas shall be graded at slopes from zero percent to two percent. Gravel surfaced parking areas exceeding two percent slope shall provide for appropriate gradation to be designed by a professional engineer. All gravel/screening shall be a minimum thickness on top of the base course/sub-grade as defined in subsection (D)(2). Alternatively, as otherwise allowed or required by base

course/sub-grade conditions and as evaluated by a professional engineer and geotechnical engineering evaluation. In all cases, unless otherwise approved by the director of the city development department or other designee of the city manager, surface drainage of that parking should be directed either to an on-site ponding area or to a permanent desilting/stilling area (planter, landscaping etc.) prior to any discharge to a public street.

3. Site drainage should be directed away from gravel/screenings surfaced parking areas.

4.

On-site ponding shall be provided for the surface area of any gravel/screening parking area if ponding for both the pre-existing undeveloped and the difference (if any) to the developed stormwater runoff from that site has not been previously provided for that site whether on-site or off-site.

5. All TAS parking shall be hard surfaced and comply with TAS requirements; gravel/screenings surfaces may be incorporated for driveways and areas not utilized for accessible routes.

6. The perimeter of all gravel/screening parking and drives shall be delineated by edging, curbing, abutting hard surface or other method as approved by the director of the city development department or other designee of the city manager.

7. The property owner shall maintain all gravel/screening surfaced parking and drive areas, on-site ponding, and/or desilting basins in clean and good condition.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17442, § 36, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17560, § 10, 5-17-2011; Ord. No. 17801, § 8, 6-5-2012, eff. 6-11-2012)

Article II. - Bicycle Parking

Article ll. - Bicycle Parking

20.14.090 - Bicycle parking required.

Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided for new buildings or facilities, additions to or enlargements of existing buildings, or for changes in the use of buildings or facilities that result in the need for additional auto parking facilities in accordance with the parking requirements in Article I of this chapter and where required in table, Section 20.14.050(C). The planning official is authorized to approve modifications to these standards when the applicant successfully demonstrates that the proposed alternative layout, location, design or type of racking meets the intent of these standards.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17442, § 37, 10-26-2010)

20.14.100 - Number of bicycle spaces.

The number of required bicycle parking spaces shall be calculated as shown in table, Section 20.14.050(C) of this chapter. Where the calculation of the required bicycle parking results in fractions of spaces, the number of spaces shall be rounded to the next highest whole number for fractions of 0.5 or greater.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.14.110 - Standards.

A. Individual bicycle parking spaces shall be a minimum of seventy-five inches long by twenty-four inches wide for each space. Where double-sided multi- racks are utilized resulting in overlapping of bicycle parking spaces, the minimum bicycle parking space for two bicycles shall be one hundred inches long by thirty-six inches wide.

B. Bicycle parking racks shall be located in areas visible from public ROW and, shall be provided with adequate lighting if intended for use after dark. Lighting shall comply with Title 18. A minimum of fifty percent of the required number of bicycle parking spaces shall be located within fifty feet of a public entrance to the building requiring bicycle parking spaces.

C. Bicycle parking racks shall support the bikes in a stable, upright position, without damage to wheels, frame or other components.

D. Bicycle parking racks shall support the frame of the bicycle and at least one wheel. Racks shall allow the frame and one wheel to be locked to the rack, regardless of whether the front wheel is removed or not. Racks shall be securely anchored. Racks shall accommodate a wide variety of sizes and types of bicycles, including those with water bottles or without kick stands.

E. Bicycle parking racks shall be permanently mounted/installed within private property on solid surfaces. Racks placed adjacent to sidewalks shall not encroach upon required pedestrian access ways, accessible routes or accessible passing space areas.

F. Access shall be provided to each required bicycle parking space. Aisles shall have a width of at least three feet to the front, rear or side of the bicycle parking spaces.

G. Racks shall be placed a minimum of twenty-four inches away from walls and other elements that may create an obstacle to accessing the bike parking spaces.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.14.120 - Bicycle parking on city right-of-way.

Where the required bicycle parking spaces cannot be properly located upon the lot generating the need for bicycle parking, the owner or applicant of the property generating the need for bicycle parking may apply for shared parking per Section 20.14.060 or a special privilege from the city for permission to locate the bicycle parking on city right-of-way.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. 16653 8 2 (part), 2007)

20.14.130 - Substitution of bicycle parking.

New and existing building and facilities may substitute up to ten percent of the required vehicular spaces for additional bike parking. Substitutions shall be made based on one vehicular parking space for at least six bicycle parking spaces. Substitutions shall be subject to the requirements of Section 20.14.100 and shall be in addition to the number of bicycle parking spaces required by this chapter.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.14.140 - Shared bicycle parking.

Whenever a shared bicycle parking arrangement is proposed to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the shared bicycle parking arrangement shall be subject to the prior approval of the planning official. To obtain approval of a shared bicycle parking arrangement, the owner or operator of the property on which the parking need is generated shall comply with the requirements of Section 20.14.060.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17442, § 38, 10-26-2010)

Article III. - Loading Standards

20.14.150 - Loading berths/spaces required.

20.14.150 - Loading berths/spaces required.

Loading berths and loading spaces for truck trailers shall be provided for new buildings or facilities, additions to or enlargements of existing buildings, or for changes in the use of buildings or facilities that result in the need for additional loading berths or spaces where required in Section 20.14.050.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.14.160 - Truck trailer parking.

The owner or operator of a building or facility shall be responsible for providing adequate parking and maneuvering areas for truck trailers as required for the proper operation of the use(s) present in the building or facility, in addition to the spaces required under Section 20.14.150. Such parking and maneuvering areas shall be designed in accordance with sound engineering practices. Areas designated for the parking of truck trailers are not required to be marked or striped. (Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.14.170 - Standards.

A. Location of Spaces. The location, design and number of required off-street parking spaces shall conform to the provisions of this chapter. Off-street truck trailer loading or parking required by this chapter shall be located on the same parcel as the use generating the loading or parking need. Parking spaces provided in excess of the required parking spaces shall also comply with the requirements of this chapter, except this subsection.

B. Responsibility for and Use of Spaces. The provision and maintenance of off-street truck trailer loading and parking shall be the responsibility of the owner of the use, building, structure and/or property on which the use generating the loading or parking need is located. Required loading or parking spaces shall be utilized only for the loading, unloading or parking of truck trailers, as appropriate, and shall not be utilized for another use or purpose for the duration of the use requiring such off-street loading or parking. The number, design or function of required off-street loading or parking spaces shall not be altered or reduced in a manner that violates the requirements of this chapter.

C. Failure to maintain required number of spaces. Failure to maintain the required number of off-street truck trailer loading or parking spaces may, after written notice to the owner or operator, result in the revocation of the certificate of occupancy for the building or facility in addition to other penalties as described in Chapter 20.24.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17560, § 11, 5-17-2011)

20.14.180 - Design and construction.

A. Minimum Dimensions and Arrangement.

1. Required off-street truck trailer loading spaces shall comply with the following minimum dimensional requirements: for truck trailer and cab combinations equal to or less than sixty feet in length, truck trailer parking spaces and berths shall be a minimum of twelve feet wide by sixty feet long with a minimum of fifty feet maneuvering area (total area = twelve feet by one hundred ten feet); for truck trailer and cab combinations greater than sixty feet in length, truck trailer parking spaces and berths shall be a minimum of twelve feet wide by seventy-five feet long with a minimum of fifty feet maneuvering area (total area = twelve feet by one hundred twenty-five feet).

2. sizes may be accepted by the building official where an appropriate layout providing adequate truck trailer maneuvering can be demonstrated. Loading berths, loading spaces and the maneuvering areas to enter and exit from each berth or space shall have a minimum of fourteen feet unobstructed height. No portion of an off-street truck trailer loading or parking space shall encroach onto a public right-of-way.

Layouts utilizing shared maneuvering area between two or more rows of truck trailer loading spaces shall be acceptable. Alternate maneuvering area

B.

Reductions. No reductions shall be permitted to the number of truck trailer loading and parking spaces and facilities required in Section 20.14.050.

C. Access to Lots. Access to off-street truck trailer loading and parking spaces shall be provided by aisles or driveways complying with Title 19 (Subdivisions), Title 13 (Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places), and this chapter. An aisle is the traveled path providing vehicular access to two or more parking spaces. Access shall be subject to approval by the director of the city development department or other designee of the city manager and shall be arranged to minimize turning movements onto and from the public right-of-way. Aisles and driveways providing access to off-street parking spaces shall connect to a dedicated public or private street or easement. Property zoned R, A, or RMU shall not be used for access to a parking area on a separate site for a use that is not permitted in the R, A or RMU zone. The maneuvering of truck trailers into and out of loading, parking and associated maneuvering areas shall not encroach upon public right-of-way or restrict, reduce, or obstruct traffic flow by vehicles or pedestrians.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17442, § 39, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17801, § 9, 6-5-2012, eff. 6-11-2012)

Article IV. - Storage Standards

20.14.190 - Purpose.

The requirements of this article are intended to provide reasonable standards for the keeping of outdoor, off-street, on-site storage.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.14.200 - Applicability.

A. This article shall apply to the outdoor storage of motor vehicles and wheeled portable units, including, but not limited to: automobiles, noncommercial trucks, light trucks, storage containers, bicycles, motorcycles, semi-trailer trucks and cabs, recreational vehicles, motor-homes, trailers, boats, buses, mobile homes, industrial housing units, etc. These requirements shall also apply to the outdoor storage of materials, products, junk, equipment or merchandise, regardless of screening from view from a public right-of-way or alley.

B. Exceptions:

1. Incidental outdoor storage of materials related to construction sites with a valid building permit;

2. Outdoor storage of live plants on lots of not less than one acre;

3. Outdoor storage of landscaping gravel, rocks, etc., for wholesale or retail sales;

4. Outdoor storage of goods incidental to agricultural uses;

5. Outdoor storage for sale of monuments for graves, including headstones, markers, statues, etc.;

6.

Outdoor storage of junked vehicles and vehicle parts, junk yards or wrecking yards, when located on property with a valid certificate of occupancy for that use at that address;

7. Outdoors storage of wheeled units that are construction or heavy equipment designed primarily to be utilized off-road, such as earth moving equipment, road graders, etc.

C.

Outdoor storage shall only be located where permitted as a principal use or an accessory use in accordance with the table of permitted uses in Chapter 20.08.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.14.210 - Standards.

A. General. Outdoor storage of all types shall comply with the following:

1. The maintenance of outdoor storage areas shall be the responsibility of the owner of the use, building, structure and/or property on which the storage is located;

2. Outdoor storage areas shall not be utilized for repair, dismantling or servicing of the stored items;

3.

Outdoors storage shall not utilize areas designated or required for off-street parking, off-street truck trailer loading, maneuvering areas, landscaping, accessible

routes or similar required elements;

4. Outdoor storage areas shall be adequately sized to ensure that all outdoor storage is located on approved surfacing.

B.

Motor Vehicles and Wheeled Units—For Sale.

1. Outdoor storage areas for the following items offered for sale at the same premises - motor vehicles, storage containers, mobile homes, industrialized housing units and other wheeled units shall comply with the surfacing requirements of Section 20.14.030(E).

2. Such outdoor storage areas shall be landscaped where required in accordance with the landscaping ordinance, including the provision of canopy trees and landscape irrigation systems.

3. Such outdoor storage of motor vehicles, not including junked or wrecked vehicles or vehicles parts, shall not be required to be screened unless required by Chapter 20.16 or other provisions of Title 20.

C. Motor Vehicles and Wheeled Units—Not For Sale.

1.

Outdoor storage areas for the following items not offered for sale at the same premises - motor vehicles, storage containers, mobile homes, industrialized housing units and other wheeled units shall comply with the surfacing requirements of Section 20.14.210(D).

2.

Such outdoor storage areas shall be landscaped where required in accordance with the landscaping ordinance, including the provision of canopy trees and landscape irrigation systems.

3.

Such outdoor storage of motor vehicles, not including junked or wrecked vehicles or vehicles parts, shall not be required to be screened unless required by Chapter 20.16 or other provisions of Title 20.

D. Outdoor Storage Standards.

1.

Outdoor storage areas for materials, products, junk, merchandise, equipment that is not a motor vehicle offered for sale and not another wheeled unit offered for sale, shall comply with the following requirements:

a. Ingress and egress aprons shall comply with Title 19;

b. Storage spaces or areas, drives and aisles shall be constructed of a minimum of six inches of sub-grade material uniformly compacted to a minimum of ninety percent of maximum density in accordance with ASTM D-1557 and a minimum of two inches of gravel/screenings;

c. The gravel/screenings shall be maintained by the owner or operator to the satisfaction of the director of the city development department or other designee of the city manager, including re-grading or restoration as needed due to traffic use, or storm related degradation.

2. Such outdoor storage areas are not required to be landscaped.

3. Such outdoor storage areas shall be required to be screened from view from adjacent properties and public streets by screening walls or fences in accordance with Chapter 20.16 or other provisions of Title 20.

4. Outdoor storage of materials, products, merchandise, etc., that is offered for sale at a licensed flea market shall comply with the surfacing requirements of Section 20.14.030(E).

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17442, § 40, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17801, § 10, 6-5-2012, eff. 6-11-2012)

Chapter 20.16 - SCREENING AND FENCING

20.16.010 - Applicability.

Fences and walls shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements set forth in this chapter.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.16.020 - Mandatory walls.

A. Where both properties are vacant, a six-foot high masonry wall (measurement of height is from the high ground) shall be erected by the owner of whichever property first builds upon it:

1. Between all R (including Ranch-Farm and NOS) and A districts;

2.

Between all R (including Ranch-Farm and NOS) and C districts;

3. Between all R (including Ranch-Farm and NOS) and manufacturing or industrial districts;

4. Between all A and C districts;

5. Between all A and manufacturing or industrial districts by the owner of whichever property that first builds upon it or uses it for outside storage;

6. Between all R (including Ranch-Farm and NOS) or A districts and all special purpose districts as part of the approved site plan for the special purpose district;

7.

In R districts (including Ranch-Farm and NOS), between residential uses and those nonresidential uses permitted in R districts by the owner of the property having the nonresidential use when he builds upon it;

B. In existing developments, a six-foot high masonry wall (measurement of height is from the high ground) shall be erected:

1.

Between all R (including Ranch-Farm and NOS) and A districts by the owner of the A property when he builds upon it;

2. Between all R (including Ranch-Farm and NOS) and C districts by the owner of the C property when he builds upon it;

3.

Between all R (including Ranch-Farm) and manufacturing or industrial districts by the owner of the M or I property when he builds upon it;

4.

Between all A and C districts by the owner of the C property when he builds upon it;

5. Between all A and manufacturing or industrial districts by the owner of whichever property first builds upon it or uses it for outside storage;

6. Between all R (including Ranch-Farm and NOS) or A districts and all special purpose districts as part of the approved site plan for the special purpose district;

7.

In R districts (including Ranch-Farm and NOS), between residential uses and those nonresidential uses permitted in R districts by the owner of the

property having the nonresidential use;

C. A six-foot-high tubular or wrought iron fence or a six-foot-high masonry wall or a combination thereof shall be erected along any property line adjacent to drainage structures or irrigation canals when buildings are erected on such properties or before the property is used for other than agricultural uses, or if the property on which the drainage structures are located on is utilized as a park/pond approved by the city; except that this requirement may be waived by the director of the city development department or other designee of the city manager if the property owner provides an alternative design to ensure the public health and safety. Such alternative design shall not include a chain link fence and shall be prepared and sealed by a professional engineer in accordance with the following conditions:

1. The side slope is equal to or less than three is to one;

2. The flow depth is equal to or less than three feet at the deepest point;

3. The velocity of the runoff is equal to or less than four feet per second.

Fencing requirements for natural drainage paths are set forth in Section 18.44.200. Property abutting non-city owned drains, canals and laterals that are used or were formally used for irrigation purposes do not need to meet the mandatory wall requirement specified in this subsection.

D.

Walls and fences as required in subsections A, B, C and G of this section shall be installed before the issuance of certificates of occupancy and compliance for any building constructed on the property or before any use is made of such property.

E. Any property used for off-street parking by special permit shall be screened from any adjacent property by a six-foot-high screening wall, if such adjacent property is R-zoned. "Adjacent" means the nearest or closest to, whether or not separated by an intervening street or alley. The screening wall shall be built in accordance to all applicable code requirements including those for visibility triangles. No openings for vehicular or pedestrian ingress or egress shall be allowed unless specifically authorized and designated on the approved site plan. The six feet height requirement may be reduced only upon a determination by the traffic engineer that a reduction is needed for safety or visibility purposes, and the reduction in wall height shall be so designated on the approved site development plan.

F. A six-foot-high screening wall shall be required for a transportation terminal type A or B, passenger station, freight station, motor-carrier terminal, warehouse, railyard, airport, intermodal facility, heliport, airpad, helistop, interlocking tower, diesel maintenance facility and railroad repair shop as provided in Section 20.10.240.

G. Where both properties are vacant or in existing developments, an eight-foot high masonry wall (measurement of height is from the high ground) shall be erected between all NOS zoning districts with a designation of a Wildlife Sanctuary and any other zoning districts. The purpose of these standards is to minimize pollution, prevent erosion, preserve wildlife habitats, and protect natural views and passive recreational opportunities.

H. Exceptions.

1. Topographic Conditions. Upon receipt of a written application from the property owner, the zoning administrator, when topographic conditions negate the visual screening effect of the wall, may approve a revised location or may waive the mandatory wall requirement or for a mandatory wall within the same property to achieve an equal or improved use of the screen.

2. Nonresidential Uses Adjacent to Open Space. Upon receipt of a written application from the property owner, the zoning administrator, when the property is adjacent to nonresidential uses or common recreational areas, such as golf courses, parks or other areas designated as open space under the provisions of this title, may approve a revised location or may waive the mandatory wall requirement.

3.

Uses Adjacent to Property Zoned NOS. A mandatory wall along the property line of a natural open space zoning district and abutting properties cannot be waived unless the Zoning Administrator makes a determination that the deviation is in harmony with the general intent of this section and consistent with the public interest, safety and general welfare. Such determinations shall be in writing and shall be maintained by the Zoning Administrator.

4. Where Streets Separate Zoning Districts. No mandatory wall shall be required where a street is the boundary line between districts except that this does not apply to properties used for outside storage.

5.

Alternative Designs. In instances whereby a masonry wall is mandatory in accordance with Sections 20.16.020 A and B, the city plan commission may consider and make a recommendation to city council for an alternative screening and fencing design.

6. Fee. An applicant will pay the established fee for processing requests to amend the mandatory wall requirement.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17306, § 5, 4-6-2010; Ord. No. 17442, § 41, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17518, § 1, 3-29-2011; Ord. No. 17801, § 11, 6-5-2012, eff. 6-11-2012; Ord. No. 18461, §§ 2, 3, 1-12-2016; Ord. No. 18531, § 7, 6-28-2016)

20.16.030 - Permitted walls.

A. In residential or apartment districts or for residential or apartment uses in other districts, a screening wall or fence not in excess of eight feet high may be erected around that part of the lot behind the front wall of the main building or behind the front yard line whenever the main building is located further back. A screening wall or fence not in excess of forty-two inches high may be erected in that part of a lot in front of the front line of the main building, except that no screening wall or fence may be more than thirty-six inches high within twenty feet of a street intersection or where visibility of vehicle or pedestrian traffic might be impeded as specified in Section 20.16.060 of this chapter.

For the purposes of this regulation, a wall or fence may exceed the heights set forth in this subsection up to a total height of ten feet, except within twenty feet of a street intersection or where vehicle or pedestrian traffic might be impeded as specified in Section 20.16.060 of this chapter. This provision applies when the vertical surface of the wall or fence above the eight feet or forty-two inches, whichever applies, is not less than seventy-five percent open, and which does not otherwise impede the vision clearance for motor vehicle or pedestrian traffic at intersections or driveway exits. The wall or fence may include wrought-iron fences with or without masonry columns, chain link, picket, split rail and other similar type fences not otherwise prohibited.

B. In commercial, manufacturing and industrial districts.

1.

Where storage is a permitted accessory use with screening, and where not otherwise prohibited, a screening wall or fence not in excess of eight feet high may be erected along or behind any lot line; provided, that the following conditions are met:

a. Where any access driveway is located, the height of such wall or fence shall not exceed forty-two inches in height within ten feet of the street lot line;

b. The wall or fence shall not exceed forty-two inches in height for visual clearance at other locations as determined by the traffic engineer; and,

c. No screening wall or fence shall be more than thirty-six inches high within twenty feet of a street intersection as specified in Section 20.16.060 of this chapter.

2.

Upon written application from the property owner, the zoning administrator may approve an additional four feet of fencing to the above eight foot

screening wall or fence provided that the following conditions are met

a. The fence does not exceed twelve feet in height;

b. The property is located in a manufacturing or industrial zoning district;

c. The fence is only utilized as screening for outside storage where fifty percent or more of the property is used for outside storage;

d. Any screening wall or fence greater than forty-two inches in height along any street frontage shall be located ten feet behind the street lot line;

e. Where a wall is located ten feet behind the street lot line, the property owner shall provide landscaping within the ten feet, between the wall and the street lot line, based on the requirements of Title 18; and,

f. The request is reviewed and approved by the traffic engineer for visual clearance at driveways and intersections.

g. Upon site plan review, the zoning administrator may require additional landscaping as part of the approval. If the zoning administrator denies the request, the property owner may appeal the decision to the city council.

3. Notwithstanding subsection B.1, security fences not in excess of twelve feet in height may be erected along or behind any lot line.

C.

If a wall is proposed to be constructed on a common property line, the written approval of the adjoining property owner must be submitted with the application for a building permit. If the city is the adjoining property owner, written approval of the zoning administrator must be requested and submitted with the application for a building permit.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. 17191, § 1, 9-15-2009; Ord. No. 019517, § 2, 6-20-2023)

20.16.040 - Masonry walls.

A.

A masonry wall may exceed the height standard up to a maximum of eight inches for the purpose of rounding off the wall.

B. Masonry walls over six feet in height must be designed by a professional engineer.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

20.16.050 - Maintenance.

Fences and walls shall be maintained in good repair and shall be kept vertical, uniform and structurally sound.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

(Ord. 16653 8 2 (part), 2007)

20.16.060 - Vision clearance at intersections.

20.16.060 - Vision clearance at intersections.

On any corner lot, within that area of a triangle (twenty-foot triangle) formed by the intersecting property lines and a diagonal line joining the property lines at points twenty feet from their intersection, the following conditions shall apply in any front yard, rear yard or both yards:

A. It is unlawful for any person to place, construct or reconstruct any building or structure, including a fence or wall, on a corner lot if the top of such building or structure is more than three feet above the level of the centerline of the nearest abutting street, and such building or structure is within the above twenty-foot triangle; provided, this subsection shall not apply to a retaining wall necessary for the support of the lot, nor to a wall of a building when the building legally extends into such triangle.

B. It is unlawful for any person to locate motor vehicles or motor vehicle parking spaces on a corner lot if the top of any motor vehicle parked there is more than three feet above the level of the centerline of the nearest abutting street, and such motor vehicles or motor vehicle parking space is within the above twenty-foot triangle.

C. Where special conditions exist, or where practical difficulties in the development and adequate use of land would result from the literal enforcement of the terms of this section, the property owner may be authorized to deviate from the requirements set forth in this section by the traffic engineer upon a determination that the deviation is in harmony with the general intent of this section, and consistent with the public interest, safety and general welfare. Such determinations shall be in writing and shall be maintained by the traffic engineer.

(Ord. 16653 § 2 (part), 2007)

Chapter 20.18 - SIGN REGULATIONS

Article I. - General Provisions

Footnotes:

--- (1) ---

Editor's note— Ord. No. 17317, § 1, adopted May 4, 2010, repealed the former Art. I, §§ 20.18.010—20.18.050, and enacted a new Art. I as set out herein. The former Art. I pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 16761 § 1 (Exh. A)(part), 2007; Ord. No. 17013, § 2, 10-14-2008; Ord. No. 17185, §§ 1—6, 9-1-2009.

20.18.010 - Title and authority.

This chapter shall be known as the "Sign Ordinance for the City of El Paso, Texas." This chapter is authorized by the Texas Local Government Code Chapters 211 and 216, the city's zoning powers, and the city's inherent police powers.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 1, 5-4-2010)

20.18.020 - Applicability.

A. This chapter shall apply to the incorporated area of the City of El Paso, Texas, and as to off-premises signs (as defined herein), to the extraterritorial jurisdiction area of the City of El Paso.

B. Compliance required. No person shall hereafter erect, construct, reconstruct, alter, repair, locate or relocate a sign, or remove or demolish an off- premises or on-premises sign except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and failure to comply with this chapter shall constitute a violation of the Code. Signs subject to this chapter may be subject to other requirements stated elsewhere within the Code, and if in conflict, the stricter provision shall control. Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or construed to conflict with Texas Local Government Code Section 216.903 (Regulation of Political Signs by Municipality).

C. Regulatory scope. This chapter applies to all signs, as defined herein, which are located on private property within the jurisdictional area of this chapter. This chapter also applies to land owned by a public entity, to include the city, when the city has land use regulatory authority over such land owned or occupied by such public entity. This chapter applies to signs on city property or the public right-of- way except as modified by Title 13 and/or Chapter 15.08. Nothing herein waives the proprietary rights the city has as a property owner. This chapter does not apply to advertising on the city's bus benches that were authorized under the city's franchise agreement, approved prior to February 19, 2013, however, beginning February 19, 2013, new bus benches with advertising may go into operation only when an existing advertising bus bench is removed from operation, on a one-to- one exchange rate; the total number of bus benches displaying advertising may not increase. This chapter does not apply to advertising on waste containers located on sidewalks or other city property authorized under the city's franchise agreement; however, new waste containers with advertising may be put into service only when an advertising waste container appearing on a franchisee's original franchise agreement with the city is removed from operation, on a one-to-one exchange rate, so that the total number of waste containers displaying advertising may not increase for each franchisee from the number described in each franchisee's original waste container franchise with the city.

D.

Additional Regulations. Signs which are outside the regulatory scope of this chapter or the jurisdiction of the city may be subject to other laws, rules, regulations and policies. A permit issued under the provisions of this chapter does not constitute compliance with county, state or federal laws, rules, regulations and policies and it is the applicant's responsibility to comply with those laws.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 1, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 17854, § 2, 8-21-2012; Ord. No. 17960, § 2, 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 18238, § 1, 9-2-2014)

20.18.030 - Purposes.

20.18.030 - Purposes.

This chapter provides a comprehensive system for the regulation of signs within the city and its extraterritorial jurisdiction area, to serve the following purposes:

A. To allow adequate opportunity for the exercise of free speech by the display of a message or an image on a sign, while balancing that opportunity against the community and public interests affected by signs.

B. To protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the City, its residents and to execute the policies of the City's Comprehensive Plan.

C. To enhance the aesthetic value of the city's landscape by reducing visual clutter that is potentially harmful to property values and economic development;

D.

To protect adjacent and nearby properties from the impact of excessive or inappropriate signage;

E.

To protect the safety and efficiency of the City's transportation network by reducing confusion and distractions to pedestrians and motorists while enhancing motorists' ability to see pedestrians, obstacles, other vehicles, and traffic signs; and

F. To preserve, protect and enhance areas of designated historical, architectural and scenic value.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 1, 5-4-2010)

20.18.035 - Onsite and offsite distinction.

Within this chapter, the onsite/offsite distinction applies only to commercial messages. Onsite has the same meaning as "on-premise" and "point-of-sale" and "point-of-purchase."

(Ord. No. 17317, § 1, 5-4-2010)

20.18.040 - Findings.

In adopting this chapter, the city council makes the following findings:

A. That the number, sizes and height of signs in the city, both off-premises and on-premise, is unduly distracting and confusing to motorists and pedestrians, creates traffic hazards, and reduces the effectiveness of signs needed to direct the public;

B. That the appearance of the city, particularly that of its residential and light commercial districts, is marred by the excessive number of signs;

C. That the aforementioned effects detract from the pleasure, safety and economic well-being of the community, and that the number of distracting signs ought to be reduced in order to lessen the detrimental effects;

D. That the use of signs in the exercise of First Amendment freedoms must be balanced against the community, neighborhood, and social impacts of such signs; and

E. That the regulations contained in this chapter are the minimum amount of regulation necessary to achieve its purposes.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 1, 5-4-2010)

20.18.050 - Definitions.

Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the following terms have these specially defined meanings. If a term is not defined hereunder, the definition contained in chapter 20.02 shall apply, provided, however, where there is conflict the definition contained in this chapter shall apply.

"Add-ons," in the context of billboards, means a design element that extends outside the structural display face on a billboard. Also called "extensions."

"Adopt-a-median sign" means a freestanding sign located in the median of a street right-of-way identifying the entity or organization that is responsible for maintaining the median where the sign is located.

"Aerial sign." See "overhead sign."

"Auxiliary sign." A sign with no commercial advertising, except for the name or logo of the business or establishment, that pertains to the safe and efficient movement of pedestrians and vehicular traffic into and out of a building or premises and that has a directional purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking," "entrance," "loading only," "telephone," "emergency entrance," and other similar directives.

"Billboard" means a permanent structure sign which meets any one or more of the following criteria: a) it is used for the display of off-site commercial messages; b) it is used for general advertising for hire; c) it functions as a principal or separate principal use of the land on which it is located, in contrast to functioning as an accessory or auxiliary to a principal use which is not a sign. The term "billboard" applies to all physical parts of the sign, including display faces, structure, support poles, attached ladders, attached catwalks, and appurtenant lighting systems, and visual display systems.

"Bulletin" means a billboard with a sign face area equal to or greater than three hundred square feet of image display area, but less than six hundred seventy-two

square feet of image display area.

"Building; marker sign." A sign indicating the name of a building, date of construction, or other incidental information about its construction and/or history. Includes cornerstones, foundation stones, and similar devices.

"Business day" means a day on which City Hall is open to the public for regular business.

"Canopy sign" means a wall sign suspended from, mounted on or otherwise supported by a canopy, arcade or portal.

"CEVMS." See "changeable electronic variable message sign."

"Changeable electronic variable message sign," also referred to by the acronym CEVM, means a sign which uses electronic technology that is capable of displaying changeable or intermittent images, such as by turning on or off various lighting elements. The term includes any illuminated sign on which such illumination is not kept stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times when such sign is in use, or which changes the visual image more than one time per twenty-four-hour period. The term includes display technology such as LED (light emitting diode) or digital displays which can vary in color or intensity, or any system which is functionally equivalent even if the message is static. The term also includes any display, or device, which changes the "static" message or copy on the sign, in "slide show" fashion, by electronic means.

"Commercial message" means an image or message which proposes or promotes a commercial transaction, or concerns the economic interests of the advertiser and/or the audience. Contrast: noncommercial message.

"Commercial mascot" means a person or live animal decorated or attired with commercial advertising insignia and displayed to the public for commercial advertising purposes. Includes sign clowns, sign twirlers, and "human sandwich board" type signs.

"Community service sign." A sign displaying a non-commercial message relating to an event or activity sponsored by a governmental organization.

"Construction sign" means a sign displayed on a construction site during the time that actual construction is continuing.

"Copy" means the visually communicative elements of a sign.

"Directory sign" means a wall or monument sign that provides a listing of names of the tenants and space numbers for a multi-tenant building, lot or park. "Display face" or "display area" means that portion of a physical structure which can be used for the display of copy.

"Establishment" means any legal use of land, other than long-term residential, which involves the use of structures subject to the Building Code and the presence of human beings on the premises more than 20 hours per week. By way of example and not limitation, this definition includes businesses, factories, farms, schools, hospitals, hotels and motels, offices and libraries but does not include single-family homes, mobile homes, residential apartments, residential care facilities, or residential condominiums. The term does not include automated facilities, such as electrical power transformer stations, broadcast towers, vending machines, etc.

"Externally illuminated sign" means the illumination of a surface of a sign from an external source of light intentionally directed upon the sign. Also known as "indirectly illuminated sign." Contrast: internally illuminated sign.

"Extraterritorial jurisdiction" has the meaning stated in Texas Local Government Code 42.021.

"Flag" means any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or design that displays the symbol(s) of a nation, state, local government, company, organization, belief system, idea, or other meaning.

"Garage sale" means the irregular selling of used and/or hand made articles on the premises of a dwelling unit. Events commonly known as estate sales, yard sales, moving sales, and their functional equivalents, are within this definition.

"General advertising" means the business of advertising other businesses, establishments or causes, typically for a fee or other consideration. Also known as general advertising for hire. The term applies regardless of whether a given message is commercial, noncommercial, or "public service" in nature.

"Home occupation sign" means a wall sign indicating the name, address or business, in any combination, of a code-compliant home occupation operated by the occupant at that residence.

"Inflatable advertising device" means a device which is inflated with air or another gas, or which is activated by wind, air, or propelled gas, and used for outdoor advertising purposes.

"Internally illuminated sign" means the illumination of an electric sign with a source of light within the sign.

"Junior" means a billboard with a sign face area not greater than seventy-two square feet.

"LED or light emitting diode" means a semiconductor diode that emits light when conducting current; as used in this chapter, the term also includes functionally equivalent technologies.

"Marquee sign" means a wall or projecting sign suspended from, mounted on or otherwise supported by a marquee, such as a canopy entrance.

"Mobile billboard sign" means a motor vehicle or trailer which is used for the display of general advertising for hire.

"Monument sign" means a freestanding sign with a one hundred percent width base; however, the sign may be supported by an internal pipe structure. Base materials may include unpainted brick, stone, or other natural material such as adobe or rammed earth (or similar veneer). Skirts shall also be constructed of a minimum three millimeter aluminum, excluding sheet metal. Also known as "ground sign."

"Multi-tenant sign" means a sign displaying messages sponsored by three or more or establishments, each of which holds a separate certificate of occupancy, located on the same lot or premises.

"Noncommercial message" means a communicative visual image not pertaining to commercial matters. Noncommercial messages commonly concern religion,

politics, social commentary and other matters of public debate. Contrast: commercial message.

"Nonconforming sign" means a sign which was legally erected prior to enactment or amendment of this Code and which has been maintained in compliance with the El Paso City Codes in effect at the time of installation, but which does not conform to the current provisions of the sign code or other applicable city ordinances. Also referred to as a legal nonconforming sign.

"Off-premises sign," also called offsite or non-point-of-sale sign means a sign displaying a commercial message that pertains to a business, person, organization, activity, event, place, service or product not principally located, or primarily manufactured, or sold on the premises on which the sign is located. Also known as "off- site sign." The on-premise/off-premises distinction applies only to commercial messages.

"On-premises sign," also called an onsite or point-of-sale sign, means a sign advertising an establishment, business, person, activity, good, product or service located on the premises where the sign is installed and maintained. In the context of construction signs, all establishments involved in the construction are considered on-premises during the time of construction. Products or services which are expected to be offered at the same location in the near future also qualify as "on-premise."

"Overhead sign" means a sign which is visible only from above, as from an airplane or helicopter, and is generally not visible to, or oriented for viewing by, persons on the ground.

"Planning official" shall be as defined in Section 1.04.030 of this Code.

"Planning division" means the planning division of the city development department.

"Pole sign" means a freestanding sign that is supported from the ground by pole(s) or a three-dimensional support structure that is not attached to a building and does not fit the definition of a monument sign.

"Portable sign" means an inanimate sign which, by virtue of its physical structure, is easily moved from one location to another. Common examples include signs on vehicles, trailers, or wheels.

"Poster" means a billboard with a display face area equal to or greater than seventy-two square feet but less than three hundred square feet.

"Primary or principal sign" means the monument or pole sign along a street frontage selected by the establishment as defined in 20.18.450.

"Real estate sign" means a temporary sign whose message pertains to a proposed economic transaction (sale, lease, rent, etc.) of real estate. Signs related to transient occupancy, such as rates and vacancies at hotels, motels, inns, and bed and breakfast facilities, are not within this definition.

"Roof sign" means a sign that is mounted on a roof or projects above the highest point of the roof line, parapet, or fascia of a building. A sign mounted on a mansard roof is a wall sign, not a roof sign.

"Secondary advertising sign" means an on-premises sign placed on private property, which is not the primary sign intended for advertising.

"Shingle sign" means a wall sign that projects from the face of a building and is suspended from a metal structure, awning, canopy or marquee, or wall.

"Sign" means any outdoor display surface, structure, search light, banner, pennant, inflatable and airborne device, whether mounted on land, air, or water, which is visible from any portion of the public right-of-way to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, a principal purpose of which is to attract attention to a communicative visual or graphic image. The term "sign" is inclusive of both on- and off-premises signs, including billboards, and any moving part, lighting, sound equipment, framework, background material, structural support, or other part thereof. A display, device, or thing need not contain lettering to be a sign. Notwithstanding the generality of the foregoing, the following are not within this definition:

• Overhead signs or banners towed behind aircraft.

• Architectural features. Decorative or architectural features of buildings (not including lettering, trademarks or moving parts), which do not perform a communicative function.

• Fireworks.

• Foundation stones and cornerstones which are permanent in nature and incapable or not intended for modification once installed.

• Grave markers, grave stones, headstones, mausoleums, shrines, and other markers of the deceased.

• Holiday and cultural observance decorations on private residential property which are on display for not more than 45 calendar days per year (cumulative, per parcel or use or dwelling unit).

• Inflatable games and gymnasiums. Inflatable, temporary, moveable, gymnasium devices commonly used for children's birthday parties, and similar devices. Also called "party jumps."

• Manufacturers' marks. Marks on tangible products, which identify the maker, seller, provider or product, and which customarily remain attached to the product even after sale.

• Mass transit graphics. Graphic images mounted on duly licensed and authorized mass transit vehicles that legally pass through the City Merchandise on public display and presently available for purchase on-site;

• News racks and newsstands;

• Personal appearance. Items or devices of personal apparel, decoration or appearance, including tattoos, makeup, wigs, costumes, masks, etc. (but not including commercial mascots or hand-held signs or appliances worn for the principal purpose of holding a sign);

• Search lights and klieg lights when used as part of a search and rescue or other emergency service operation; this exclusion does not apply to search lights or klieg lights used as attention attracting devices for commercial or special events;

• Shopping carts, golf carts, horse drawn carriages, and similar devices; any motorized or self-propelled vehicle which may be legally operated upon a public road is not within this exclusion;

• Symbols of non-commercial organizations or concepts including, but not limited to, religious or political symbols, when such are permanently integrated into the structure of a permanent building which is otherwise legal; by way of example and not limitation, such symbols include stained glass windows on churches, carved or bas relief doors or walls, bells, religious statuary, etc.

• Vehicle and vessel insignia on street legal vehicles and properly licensed watercraft or aircraft: license plates, license plate frames, registration insignia, non-commercial messages, messages relating to the establishment of which the vehicle or vessel is an instrument or tool (not including general advertising) and messages relating to the proposed sale, lease or exchange of the vehicle or vessel;

• Vending machines, product dispensing devices and automated product intake devices which do not display offsite commercial messages or general advertising messages; by way of example and not limitation, "automated product intake devices" means machines which accept recycle materials, or "book return" slots at libraries, or "leave your clothes here" boxes at laundry places;

• Window displays. The display of merchandise in a store window and offered for sale.

"Sign cut-outs" means the following:

A. The area of sign face extension available to complete the artwork on a billboard.

B. The portion of the sign structure area of a monument sign that is completely open or void.

"Sign height" means the following:

1. For freestanding signs, the vertical measurement between the highest part of the sign, excluding all billboard add-ons, and the ground level upon which the sign is located;

2. For wall and all other signs, the vertical measurement of the sign area.

3. Small format billboard means a billboard which has a display face of less than 72 square feet.

"Special event directional sign" means a temporary sign providing direction information to a properly authorized special event that is open to the public.

"Static billboard" means a billboard which displays a single visual image that does not change more frequently than once per 24-hour period and does not include LED or CEVM or functionally equivalent technology.

"Structure area" means the entire area of a monument sign structure, which is computed by multiplying the sign height by the sign structure width.

"Structure support width" applies to freestanding signs and means the width of the three-dimensional support structure(s) that extends from the top of the sign structure to the ground.

"Subdivision identification sign" means a monument or wall sign located at a main entrance of a housing subdivision.

"Temporary banner" means a temporary sign composed of lightweight fabric or similar material used to attract visual attention. Flags are not within this definition.

"Temporary active motion inflatable" means a temporary type of inflatable sign utilizing wind baffles and fabric combined with a vortex of air created by a mechanical air system to allow the inflatable to dance and move, and which does not contain any words, numerals, trademarks, pictures, designs, or objects. Such devices are also known as "aircrows," "wind dancers" and "air dancers."

"Temporary construction sign" means a temporary sign located on a construction site, typically used to display messages concerning the owner, occupant, contractor, architect, engineer, financial institution, real estate company or similar entities involved with the construction at that site.

"Temporary sign" means a sign which, by virtue of its construction from lightweight or flimsy materials, and construction or installation by hand or with ordinary hand tools, is not suitable for long term display.

"Temporary inflatable sign" means an inflatable advertising device greater than two cubic feet in volume, used for advertising purposes.

"Temporary special event sign" means a temporary sign advertising a properly authorized special event and located at the site of the event.

"Temporary subdivision kiosk signs" means a sign that shall include any or all of the following: the name of the subdivision(s), the name of the developer or subdivider of record, the name of the homebuilder(s) and a descriptive statement describing the development (e.g. single-family homes, condominiums, etc.) and directional information including arrows or other similar symbols for the purpose of direction only.

"Tri-vision sign" means a rotating slat sign whose rotation is completed within one second and the message is stationary for at least 8 seconds following a rotation.

"Wall sign" means a sign permanently affixed to any wall or vertical portion of a building not extending beyond the elevation of the building.

"Warning and notice signs" are signs containing information or symbols about regulatory violations, hazardous conditions, or other educational messages; examples include "beware of dog," "high voltage," "no trespassing," "eviction notice," etc.

"Wayfinding sign" means a sign, map, or marker designed, constructed, installed and managed by the city located on city property or right-of-way placed by the

city that guides the traveling public to key civic, cultural, visitor, and recreational destinations; educational, scholastic or artistic events; community or public interest activities or destinations; designated or recognized civic routes or trails; areas of historical or archaeological significance; or trade shows, events and festivals. Any sponsorship information contained on a wayfinding sign shall be limited to twenty percent of the sign and shall only contain the name of the sponsor.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 1, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 17442, §§ 42—44, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17585, § 2, 6-14-2011; Ord. No. 17801, § 12, 6-5-2012, eff. 6-11-2012; Ord. No. 17854, § 3, 8-21-2012; Ord. No. 18134, § 3, 3-4-2014)

Article II. - Administration

Footnotes:

--- (2) ---

Editor's note— Ord. No. 17317, § 2, adopted May 4, 2010, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 20.18.100—20.18.140, and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 16761 § 1 (Exh. A)(part), 2007; Ord. No. 17001, § 2, 2008; Ord. No. 17013, § 2, 10-14-2008; Ord. No. 17185, §§ 5—7, 9-1-2009.

20.18.100 - Sign permit.

A. Sign permit required. The purpose of a permit is to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A sign permit shall be required prior to the placing, erecting, constructing, moving, installing, displaying, mounting, reconstructing, repairing, relocating, or demolishing of any sign, unless the subject sign or activity is expressly exempted from the permit requirement by this chapter or other applicable law. Signs requiring a permit shall comply with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws and ordinances.

B. All new billboards erected within the city shall have the permit number affixed to the structure below the sign face. The number must be visible for a distance of fifty feet from the pole supporting the billboard.

C. Decision time. As to all signs which require a permit, the decision on the application for such permit shall be made within thirty business days of submission of a complete application. Decisions on appeals to the zoning board of adjustment shall be made by the zoning board of adjustment within 30 business days from the date the board hears the appeal. This time limit shall apply anew to each stage of review or appeal. After receipt of a complete sign application, the planning official shall render a decision to approve, approve with modifications or conditions, or deny the sign request. Unless the applicant waives time, failure of the planning official to issue a written decision within thirty business days shall constitute denial of the application. During the application and appeal procedures, the status quo shall be maintained, unless an existing sign, by virtue of its physical condition, presents an immediate and significant threat to the public safety, in which case it may be removed or repaired pending the outcome of the appeal.

D. Review criteria. When reviewing a sign permit application, no consideration shall be given to the proposed message or the proposed graphic design, so long as the intended message is within the protections of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and/or corollary provisions of the Texas Constitution. This provision does not prevent consideration of whether a sign will or will not be used to display offsite commercial messages. Such a review shall ensure that any sign proposal is in conformance with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable law, regulation and policy.

E. Any existing moratorium imposed by ordinance of city council regarding the acceptance and issuance of permits shall not apply to the application for and the issuance of permits required under this Code when the purpose is to achieve Code compliance, or applications or permits for the repair and maintenance of existing legal signs, provided that such maintenance and repair does not structurally alter the sign.

F. Where the building official determines that a permit was issued in accordance with the law in effect at the time the sign was erected and that such permit was lost or destroyed, the building official shall provide a replacement permit when the sign permit is still valid under such law.

G.

Sign permit applications must be accompanied by all applicable fees, as established by formal action of city council.

H. After a permit application has been submitted, if additional information is requested in order to process the application, then the applicant has ninety days to provide the information or the sign permit application shall be deemed to have been abandoned. One extension of time for a period not to exceed ninety days may be allowed by the permit official if the extension is requested in writing.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 1, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 17442, § 45, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17686, § 2, 12-6-2011; Ord. No. 17960, § 3, 2-19-2013)

20.18.110 - Application procedure.

A.

Permit—Method of application. An application for a sign permit shall be made on forms as prescribed by the planning official. Such an application shall be filed with the planning division. The application shall be accompanied by any fees or bonds as specified by city council resolution. In addition to all the information required by Title 18 (Building and Construction), the application for a sign permit shall include the following:

1.

Permit application—Contents. A sign permit application shall contain the location by street and number of the proposed sign structure, the PID for the property, as well as the name and address of the owner and the sign contractor or installer. One electronic copy, in a format authorized by the planning official, and three copies of the plans, fully dimensioned, shall be filed with the application, including:

a. Plot plan, fully dimensioned, showing location and dimensions of all buildings and improvements and the location of each proposed sign together with the location, setback, size and height of all existing signs on the premises/site. The street frontage shall be clearly indicated on the plan as well as the property line;

b. Elevation plan, fully dimensioned, showing height and size of each proposed sign, method of illumination and materials of construction, and if a wall sign, the exact location on the face of the building;

c. Nearest street intersections and abutting arterials;

d. Legal description of the property;

e. Zoning;

f. Written evidence that the property owner has authorized the placing of the sign(s) on the property;

g. Structural and wind load calculations;

h.

Name, address and city or state sign electrical contractor license number of applicant;

i. If the proposed sign is over twenty-four feet high, the certification of an engineer licensed or registered in Texas; and

j. Structural details and circulations prepared and signed by an engineer or architect registered in the State. Such details shall be required when the area of the sign exceeds five square feet and the height of the sign exceeds six feet. Structural details shall include all attachments such as satellite dishes, sign cabinets, etc. These plans shall also be submitted electronically in a format authorized by the planning official.

2.

A statement by the owner of the proposed sign as to whether the display face will be permanent, changeable, or a permanent structure with changeable elements. If the proposed sign is to be used to display commercial messages, then the applicant shall also state whether the message is to be onsite or offsite, and whether it is proposed to be used to display general advertising for hire.

B. For billboard sign demolitions and/or relocations and/or replacements.

1. Size and location of all sign(s) to be removed or relocated;

2. Photograph or digital image of all sign(s) to be removed;

3.

A copy of the original permit for the sign(s) to be removed or a copy of the registration list provided to the city manager or designee, provided that the sign to be demolished, relocated or replaced must be on the registration list;

4.

For billboard replacement or relocation permits for billboards removed after July 2, 2002:

a. Completed application with site plan and structural calculations;

b. Size(s), location(s) and type(s) of sign(s) removed; and

c. Copy of the demolition permit(s) for the sign(s) removed;

5. Issuance of building permits and revocation of permits shall be done in accordance with provisions of Title 18.

C.

Multiple sign applications. When an application proposes two or more signs, the application may be granted either in whole or in part, with separate decisions as to each proposed sign.

D.

Grounds for denial. When an application is denied in whole or in part, the planning official's written notice of determination shall specify the grounds for such denial.

E. Portable sign permits shall not be issued for a period of more than three hundred sixty-five days.

F. Revocation or cancellation. The planning official shall revoke any approval or permit upon refusal or failure of the holder thereof to comply with the provisions of this chapter and/or the terms or conditions of any permit, after written notice of noncompliance and at least ten (10) days opportunity to cure.

G. Permits issued in error. Any approval or permit issued in error may be summarily revoked at any time by the city upon written notice to the holder of the reason for the revocation.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 1, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 17442, § 46, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17960, § 4, 2-19-2013)

20.18.115 - Appeals.

All sign permit applications shall be initially reviewed by the director. When the director issues a decision on a sign permit application, or when the time for doing so has expired without a written decision, then the applicant or any concerned person may appeal to the zoning board of adjustment under the provisions of 2.16.040 of the El Paso City Code. The appeal shall be processed under the same procedures specified for appeals to the zoning board of adjustment. The zoning board of adjustment shall hold a duly noticed public hearing thereon, and issue a written decision thereon, within 30 business days. Failure of the board to render a decision within the time specified hereunder shall deem the appeal denied. The written decision shall make findings and state reasons, supported by evidence in the record, for the decision. In determining the appeal, the zoning board of adjustment shall not consider message content or graphical design of the sign, unless the message or image has no protection under the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 1, 5-4-2010)

20.18.120 - Maintenance.

20.18.120 - Maintenance.

A. Every sign, including those specifically exempt from this Code in respect to permits and permit fees, shall be maintained in good structural condition at all times. All signs shall be kept neatly painted, including all metal parts and supports thereof, except those portions that are galvanized or of rust-resistant material. The building official shall inspect all signs and shall have the authority to order the painting, repair, alteration or removal of any sign which constitutes a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance or dilapidation. The owner of the property on which a sign is located and the owner of the sign shall be jointly and severally responsible for the conditions of the area occupied by the sign and shall be required to keep the area clean, sanitary and free from rubbish; and failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation of this Code. For purposes of responsibility, the owner of the property refers, jointly and severally, to the legal owner of the property, as well as to all parties holding the present right of possession and control.

B.

Billboard maintenance and repair. The following are considered to be routine maintenance activities that do not require a permit:

1. The replacement of nuts and bolts;

2. Nailing, riveting, or welding;

3. Cleaning and painting;

4. Changing of the advertising message;

5. The replacement of minor parts if the materials of the minor parts are the same type as those being replaced and the basic design or structure of the sign is not altered;

6. Changing all or part of the sign face structure but only if like materials are used.

C.

The following are customary maintenance activities that require a permit before initiation:

1. Replacement of poles, but only if not more than one-half of the total number of poles of the sign structure are replaced in any twelve-month period and the same material is used for the replacement poles; and

2. Adding a catwalk to the sign structure.

D.

The following are examples of substantial changes that require a permit application before the initiation of such an activity; however, legal nonconforming signs may not engage in such maintenance activities and will lose their legal nonconforming status if they engage in such maintenance, regardless of whether or not a permit was issued:

1. Adding lights to an unilluminated sign or adding more intense lighting to an illuminated sign whether or not the lights are attached to the sign structure;

2. Changing the number of poles in the sign structure;

3. Adding permanent bracing wires, guy wires, or other reinforcing devices, except if the structure is modified to convert a static sign to a CEVM sign to conform with the current IBC Code;

4.

Changing the material used in the construction of the sign structure, such as replacing wooden material with metal material;

5. Adding faces to a sign or changing the sign configuration;

6. Increasing the height of the sign;

7. Changing the configuration of the sign structure, such as changing a "V" sign to a stacked or back-to-back sign, or a single face sign to a back-to-back sign; and

8. Moving the sign structure or sign face in any way unless the movement is made in accordance with a relocation or replacement.

E. An added catwalk must meet occupational safety and health administration guidelines.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 1, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 17960, § 5, 2-19-2013)

20.18.130 - Removal of signs.

A. After inspection by the building official, the following signs may be subject to removal by the city, in accordance with the procedure enumerated herein; however, the city may at any time under its police powers immediately remove signs which constitute and immediate danger to persons or property without going through the procedures identified herein:

1.

Signs or their supporting structures which appear to the building official to have become abandoned, neglected or made unattractive by missing letters, panels, lights, faded or peeling paint or graffiti;

2. Any sign which constitutes a hazard to safety, health or public welfare by reason of inadequate maintenance or dilapidation;

3. Any sign erected without permit that cannot be registered under the provisions in this chapter.

B.

Procedure. Except as provided herein, prior to the removal of a sign by the city, the building official shall follow the following procedure:

1. The building official shall inform the permit holder, if a permit has been issued; if no permit has been issued, the building official shall send a written notice, via certified mail, to the owner, if the owner is known, by mailing a written notice to the last known address of the owner, or lessee of the sign if that person is identified on the sign or is otherwise known to the building official, to remove such sign and structure or to cure the defect resulting from its neglect within a period of ten days after receipt of notification of violation of this chapter.

2. If the permit holder, owner, or lessee is unknown or cannot be reached, the building official shall publish a legal notice identifying the sign, its location and the corrective action required. The legal notice shall be given by any contemporary means of information sharing, including, but not limited to, publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and placement on the city's official website.

3. If no response is received by the building official within ten working days from the date of receipt of notification, or five working days after the date of publication, the building official shall refer the case to the building and standards commission and the case shall be processed under the procedures of Chapter 2.38 of the El Paso City Code.

C. An on-premises sign shall be removed in compliance with the Local Government Code Title 7 Subtitle A. Sec. 216.003.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 1, 5-4-2010)

20.18.140 - Prohibited signs.

In addition to the list of prohibited signs stated below, any sign erected in violation of the city's building, electrical, lighting, or other applicable local, state or federal regulations, not expressly authorized by the code, a sign not specifically authorized by action of city council or specifically exempted from the provisions hereof, is prohibited within the corporate limits of the city and, as to billboards only, the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction. The following sign types are prohibited:

A. New static or CEVM billboards except as provided herein.

B. Off-premises commercial wall signs, except as provided herein.

C. Off-premises portable signs or any portable sign that is electrical or is more than seven feet in height including the support structure.

D. Wall signs that extend beyond the elevation of the building more than three feet.

E. Any sign which resembles an official traffic sign or signal or that bears the words "Stop," "Go," "Slow," "Caution," "Danger," "Warning" or similar words, or that bears symbols communicating similar meanings in a manner which is likely to be confused with official traffic signs.

F.

Signs which, by reason of their size, location, movement, content, coloring or manner of illumination, may be confused with or construed to be a

traffic control sign, signal or device, or the light of an emergency or road equipment vehicle, or which hide from view any street or traffic sign, signal or device.

G. Any banner, handbill whether commercial or noncommercial, advertisement, notice, circular poster, piece of paper, figure, word, or letter, or any other kind of sign printed, painted, cut, branded, stamped, marked, written, posted, pasted, installed, or affixed in any way upon any utility post or stand, upon traffic control signs or signals, or upon any public property or public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public buildings, sidewalks, parkways, easements and curbs; unless such sign is installed or affixed pursuant to authorization granted a special privilege license or by a city ordinance, resolution, or other valid official city authorization, or is otherwise permitted or regulated in the code.

H.

Signs on vehicles or trailers that are parked or located for the primary purpose of displaying a commercial message. It shall be prima facie evidence that the primary purpose of a vehicle or trailer is to display a sign if the vehicle or trailer is parked on a site, or in the same general location, for a continuous period exceeding seventy-two hours per month. This prohibition does not apply to a vehicle displaying a commercial message which pertains to the establishment of which the vehicle is an instrument, and the parking is short term and incidental to the performance of the establishment's customary activities.

I. Reserved.

J. Festoons, including tinsel, strings of ribbon, streamers and pinwheels.

K. Signs erected or maintained upon trees, painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural features.

L. Satellite dishes, cell phone, microwave or broadcast towers, operable or inoperable, used as signs.

M.

Signs, any portion of which revolves or rotates at a speed greater than three revolutions per minute.

ZE

N.

Animated, flashing, running light or twinkle signs, excluding CEVM signs that are permitted pursuant to the provisions of Article III of this chapter.

O. Signs projecting or displaying three-dimensional or holographic images.

P. "V" type signs with a face that protrudes from the opposite face at an interior angle greater than twenty-five degrees. This restriction shall not be construed to prohibit oval, cylindrical or box type signs.

Q. Signs located on or attached in any manner to fences or between or on the poles of another sign or light fixture, except as may be permitted herein.

R. Signs projected (from a light source) onto the sides of buildings.

S. CEVM billboards and on premise signs, except that CEVM billboards and CEVM on-premises signs which conform to the provisions of this chapter are

allowed.

T. Static or CEVM billboards, except that static or CEVM billboards and CEVM on-premises signs which conform to the provisions of this chapter are allowed.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 2, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 17960, § 6, 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 18245, § 2, 9-16-2014; Ord. No. 19300, § 1, 2-15-2022)

Article III. - Billboard Regulations

Footnotes:

--- (3) ---

Editor's note— Ord. No. 17317, § 2, adopted May 4, 2010, repealed the former Art. II, §§ 20.18.200—20.18.280, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 16761 § 1 (Exh. A)(part), 2007.

20.18.200 - Zoning districts.

A.

From and after the effective date of this ordinance, no new billboards may be constructed, erected, installed or modified within the corporate limits of the city, or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, and no building permit shall be issued for the construction, erection, or modification of a new billboard or an existing billboard in the city and the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, except as authorized by this article.

B.

Static billboards or non-CEVM billboards.

1.

Construction of new static billboard or non-CEVM billboards are prohibited unless the owner or applicant complies with the following provisions and shall only be constructed in C-2, C-3, C4, MI, M2, and M3 districts:

a. Non-transit corridors. In order to construct one new static non-CEVM billboard, the applicant must demolish and permanently remove at least one legally permitted and erected existing billboard structure of the same size.

b. Transit corridors. Interstate Highway 10, Alarneda Avenue, Dyer Street, Mesa Street, and Montana Avenue are defined as transit corridors for the purposes of this chapter. In order to construct one new static non-CEVM billboard, the applicant must demolish and permanently remove at least two legally permitted and erected existing billboard structures of the same size from any of the five transit corridors.

c. The applicant requesting the permit for a new static non-CEVM billboard shall identify the locations and total display face area of the existing billboard sign structures to be demolished, and obtain a demolition permit for each billboard sign structure to be removed prior to issuance of the permit for the new billboard. Each of the billboard structures identified to be demolished must be demolished and the entire structure completely removed prior to the construction and operation of the new static billboard.

d. The application for the replacement permit for the new static non-CEVM billboard sign shall be submitted to the planning division within nine months of the issuance of the demolition permit(s) for the removed billboard(s). If an application permit is not submitted within that time, then the replacement permit shall not be issued for the removed billboards signs and no credit shall be given for the removal of such billboard(s).

e. The size of the new static non-CEVM billboard shall be the same as the size of those billboard structures removed, except that the following shall be allowed:

1. One bulletin billboard structure shall be permitted for two existing legally permitted and erected poster billboard structures removed,

2. One poster billboard structure shall be permitted for four existing legally permitted and erected junior billboard structures removed,

3. One bulletin billboard structure shall be permitted for eight existing legally permitted and erected junior billboard structures removed;

f.

If the new billboard structure is double-faced, then all structures removed shall be double-faced.

g.

The new static non-CEVM billboard sign must comply with all of the provisions of this chapter and the City Code, including but not limited to electrical, plumbing, grading, etc.

C.

CEVM billboards. From and after the effective date of this ordinance, no new CEVM billboards may be constructed, erected, installed or modified within the corporate limits of the city, or within its extraterritorial jurisdiction, and no building permit shall be issued for the construction, erection, or modification of a new CEVM billboard or an existing billboard in the city and the city's extraterritorial jurisdiction, except as authorized by this article.

1.

Construction of new CEVM billboards is prohibited unless the owner or applicant complies with all of the following provisions and shall only be constructed in C-3, C-4, M-1, M-2, and M-3 districts:

a. For every one square foot of CEVM billboard display area converted from a static billboard, at least five square feet of static display area must be permanently and completely removed. Of the signs removed to fund this conversion exchange, at least one billboard shall be of a like size as the CEVM display installed or erected.

b. For a period of one hundred eighty days from the date this ordinance is adopted [February 19, 2013], existing static signs may be converted to CEVM signs provided that the following criteria are met:

(1) Except for setback requirements specified in Section 20.18.230, all other requirements, to include the conversion rate, of the sign code are be complied with.

(2)

If a static sign is converted to a CEVM sign and does not comply with the provisions of Section 20.18.230, the converted sign shall be considered legal

nonconforming and shall comply with all of the following conditions:

a. The display face shall face away at a forty-five degree angle from any R-F, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-5, P-RI, P-RII, RMH, PMD, A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-M, A-3/O, A-O, R-MU, G-MU, I-MU, or SmartCode Zone.

b. A buffer (interstate highway, streets classified as major arterials, or a C-4 commercial district or manufacturing district) existing between the converted sign and any R-F, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-5, P-RI, P-RII, RMH, PMD, A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-M, A-3/O, A-O, R-MU, G-MU, I- MU, or SmartCode Zone (a buffer of a minor arterial may be allowed provided that there is a setback of four hundred twenty feet from the sign and the above districts).

c. The applicant requesting the permit for a new CEVM billboard shall identify the locations and total display face area of the existing static billboard sign structures to be removed or existing demolition credits to be utilized, and obtain a demolition permit for each static billboard sign structure to be removed prior to issuance of the permit for the new CEVM billboard. Each of the static billboard structures identified to be removed must be demolished and the entire structure completely removed to grade level prior to the construction or installation of the new CEVM billboard, including the support structure, electrical connections, catwalk (if any), and special grading and post holes completely covered.

d. The new CEVM billboard sign must comply with all of the provisions of this chapter and the City Code, including but not limited to electrical, structural, and grading requirements.

2. Owner or operator responsibilities.

a.

The face of the CEVM sign permit application must identify contact information for an emergency contact available to turn off the CEVM sign within twelve hours after a malfunction occurs.

b. A CEVM display shall contain a default mechanism to show a "full black" image or turn the sign off in case of malfunction, or shall be manually turned off within twelve hours of a reported malfunction. Provided, however, if after twelve hours the sign has not defaulted to "full black" or turned off, the city shall have the right to power off the sign.

c. CEVM signs shall display the permit number issued by the city for the sign on the billboard structure.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 3, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 17442, § 47, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17960, § 7, 2-19-2013)

20.18.210 - Time for construction.

Construction of new and converted billboards must be completed within six months after issuance of a permit. One six-month extension may be granted by the planning division upon a showing that the permittee has diligently attempted to complete the installation.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 3, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 17442, § 48, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17960, § 8, 2-19-2013)

20.18.220 - Size and height.

A. In zoning districts C-3, C-4, M-1, M-2, and M-3 districts on Interstate Highway 10, new static and new-CEVM may have operational display faces up to six hundred seventy-two square feet in display area, with the new static or new-CEVM being no higher than sixty feet, excluding a cutout that extends above the rectangular border of the sign, measured:

1. From the grade level of the centerline of the main-traveled way, not including a frontage road of a controlled access highway, closest to the sign at a point perpendicular to the sign location; or

2. If the main-traveled way is below grade, from the base of the sign structure.

B. In zoning districts C-3, C4, M1, M2, and M3 districts on major arterials, super arterials, or higher category arterials, new static and new-CEVM billboards may have display faces up to three hundred square feet in display area, with the top of the sign face not more than thirty-five feet above the grade of the freeway, expressway, or interstate regulated highway.

C. Not more than eight bulletin billboards, spaced a minimum of six thousand feet apart, are permitted on Loop 375 from Interstate Highway 10 to Montana.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 3, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 17686, § 2, 12-6-2011; Ord. No. 17960, § 9, 2-19-2013; Ord. No. 18974, § 1, 9-3-2019)

20.18.230 - Setback requirements for new static and CEVM billboards.

A. New static billboards must be at least 350 feet from the property line of any residential use or the following zoning districts: R-F, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-5, P-RI, P-RII, RMH, PMD, A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-M, A-3/O, A-O, R-MU, G-MU, I-MU, or SmartCode Zone. These setback provisions do not apply to a sign abutting a SmartCode Zone where residential use is prohibited by law.

B. New CEVM billboards must be at least 500 feet from the property line of any residential use or the following zoning districts: R-F, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-5, P-RI, P-RII, RMH, PMD, A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-M, A-3/O, A-O, R-MU, G-MU, I-MU, or SmartCode Zone. These setback provisions do not apply to a sign abutting a SmartCode Zone where residential use is prohibited by law.

C.

New static and new CEVM billboards up to seventy-two square feet in area must be thirty- five feet from the property line, as that term is defined in 20.02.746, of

the following zoning districts when located on the same side of the street: C-1 and C-5. In no case shall the property line extend into the parkway or right-of-way.

D. New static and new CEVM billboards larger than seventy-two square feet must be fifty feet from the property line as that term is defined in 20.02.746, of the following zoning districts when located on the same side of the street: C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, and C-5. In no case shall the property line extend into the parkway or right-of-way.

E. No new static or CEVM billboards will be allowed within 35 feet of a freestanding on- premises sign on the same side of the street.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 3, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 17960, § 10, 2-19-2013)

20.18.240 - Spacing for billboards.

A. New Static, Non-CEVM billboards, and new CEVM billboards shall be spaced 1,500 feet apart from other static and CEVM billboards on the same side of the street or road

B. All measurements made under this subsection are in feet and measured linearly perpendicular from a point on the outside edge of the display face of the sign along the roadway from which it is to be viewed, except that the measurements between a CEVM billboard and another CEVM billboard shall also wrap (continue around) the corner of any block face along the same block, but shall not cross the ROW.

C. Spacing requirements for any signs shall not be diminished by an arterial, structure, or natural feature, except as provided in Section 20.18.200 C

(Ord. No. 17317, § 3, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 17960, § 11, 2-19-2013)

20.18.250 - Special control areas.

New static, non-CEVM billboards and new CEVM billboards are prohibited in the following special control areas: A. Significant Landmarks Designated by the United States, the State of Within 500 feet of any designated historical landmark, site or building property line. Within the boundaries of the district and or within 500 feet of the center line of streets forming the boundaries of the district. C. Designated Special Districts, Central Business District The area bounded by Interstate Highway 10 on the north, St. Vrain/Virginia Streets on the east, Paisano Drive on the south, and by a line tangent to the west facade of Union Depot, running north to south from Interstate Highway 10 to Paisano Drive. The area bounded by Paisano Drive on the north, Rio Grande International Boundary on the south, Park Street on the east, and Santa Fe Street on the west. Ysleta Mission Area (includes the Tigua Indian Reservation) Within a 1,200 feet radius from Mission steeple. Such lands as defined by the Zoning, Grading, and Subdivision Ordinances of the City of E1 Paso for the protection of the Franklin Mountains. Areas Restricted From Signage Within 1,000 feet from right-of-way line from Raynolds on the east, Yandell on the north, Gramma on the west, and junction with the Paisano/Juarez exits on the south. Within 1,000 feet from right-of-way line from junction of I-10 and U.S. 54 to junction with Loop 375, including the Cordova Port of Entry. Within 1,500 feet of this intersection. Within 1,500 feet of this intersection.

Texas, or the City of E1 Paso.

B. All Historic Districts

South El Paso

Mountain Development Area (MDA)

D. Freeway Interchanges

I-10 at U.S. 54

U.S. 54 at Loop 375 (Cesar Chavez Border Highway)

I-10 at Loop 375 (Transmountain Road)

I-10 at Loop 375 (Americas Avenue)

E. Designated Scenic Corridors

Within 1,000 feet from either right-of-way line of an arterial within the

following scenic corridors:

Loop 375 (Cesar Chavez Border Highway and Americas Avenue) from

Santa Fe Street to I-10

Zaragoza Road from Zaragoza Port of Entry to Alameda Avenue I-10 from Schuster Drive to the Central Business District Mesa Street from Sun Bowl Drive to the Central Business District Rim Road Scenic Drive Schuster Drive/Murchison Drive McKelligon Canyon Road Alabama Drive/Magnetic Drive Airport Drive Fred Wilson Avenue U.S. 54 from Hondo Pass Avenue to the Texas/New Mexico State line Alameda Avenue from Loop 375 (Americas Avenue) to Zaragoza Road Old Gary-Artcraft Road/Paseo del Norte Road Country Club Road/Westside Drive Diana Drive from U.S. 54 to Dyer Street Doniphan Drive Resler Drive E1 Paso Street Hondo Pass Avenue Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard McCombs Street from U.S. 54 to the Texas/New Mexico state line

McKinley Avenue

Northeast Parkway

Paisano Drive from Sunland Park Drive to Alameda Avenue

Santa Fe Street

tt ee a i ee

F. Park/open space

Within 1,500 feet of the property line.

G. School, Church or Hospital H. Ports of Entry Santa Fe/Stanton Stanton Zaragoza Cordova (including I-10/U.S. 54 and U.S. 54/Loop 375 freeway interchanges) New Ports-of-Entry Within 500 feet of the property line. The following area at the Santa Fe Port of Entry: Bounded by the alley in Block 43, Campbell Addition, running north-south from Paisano to the International Border, the centerline of Paisano Drive, running east- west; the centerline of the alley in Block 139, Campbell Addition, running north-south from Paisano to the centerline of Sixth Street, running east to the centerline of Block 74 thence said line running south to the International Border, the International Border being the southern boundary. Within the following area at the Stanton Street Port of Entry: Bounded by the centerline of the alley of Block 47, Campbell Addition, running north-south from the International Border to the centerline of Paisano Drive, the east-west to the centerline of the alley of Block 137 Campbell Addition, running north-south to the border line being the southern boundary. Within 500 feet of the centerline of Zaragoza Road, running from the bridge abutment to Socorro Road. Within 500 feet from the state right-of-way from Raynolds on the east, Yandell on the north, Gramma on the west, and junction with the Paisano/Juarez exits on the south. Within 500 feet from the state right-of-way line from junction of I-10 and U.S. 54 to junction with Loop 375, including the Cordova Port of Entry. Within 1,500 feet from the property line of a port-of-entry.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 3, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 17960, § 12, 2-19-2013)

20.18.260 - Construction of billboards.

The following shall govern the construction of any billboard sign:

A. Stacked billboards are prohibited;

B.

V-shape billboards with an angle of construction greater than forty-five degrees are prohibited. Where two structures are used for the construction of a V-shape

sign, such structures shall not be separated, at their closest point, by more than two feet.

C. New CEVM displays shall not be permitted to be erected back-to-back.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 3, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 17960, § 13, 2-19-2013)

20.18.270 - Relocation of billboards.

20.18.270 - Relocation of billboards.

A.

Relocation of certain billboard for a city public works project or city or state roadway improvement project.

1. Legal and legal non-conforming billboards located on or overhanging a parcel of land acquired by the State of Texas for roadway expansion projects may be relocated subject to the restrictions in this section.

2. The owner of the billboard must submit a billboard relocation application, along with supporting documentation from the state requiring the relocation, within one year after the billboard is actually removed from the parcel of land. The applicant shall pay the established fee. The relocation must be completed within one year after approval of the relocation application.

3.

Except as provided in this section, relocated billboards must fully comply with the size, height, spacing, setback, and other restrictions in this title.

4. Relocation to remainder.

a. All relocated billboards must be relocated to the remainder of the tract on which the billboard is located, unless it is not possible for the following reasons:

b. There is no remainder;

c. The owner of the billboard is unable to obtain an agreement from the property owner of the remainder; or

d. The remainder is not of sufficient size or suitable configuration to allow the relocated billboard to be as visible as the original billboard from the nearest main traveled thoroughfare.

e.

Billboards relocated to a remainder must comply with Section 20.22.090, and must be placed no less than five hundred feet from an existing billboard.

5. Restrictions on relocations.

a.

A billboard shall not be relocated to a scenic corridor or special control area.

b. A billboard not located on a road on the state highway system must be relocated at least five hundred feet from another off-premises billboard.

c. A billboard located on a road on the state highway system must be relocated at least five hundred feet from another off-premises billboard on the same side of the freeway.

d. A relocated billboard may not have a greater sign face area than it had at its original location, except that the sign face area of multiple relocated billboards may be combined, provided that:

i. The overall number of billboards within the city is reduced;

ii. The sign face area of the combined billboard shall not exceed six hundred seventy-two square feet, the maximum size of a bulletin sign;

iii. Stacked billboards are prohibited.

e.

Two one-sided billboards may be relocated to create one two-faced billboard, provided that the two faces are oriented within sixty degrees of one another.

f. All relocated billboards must be built to comply with the building code.

g. A billboard may not be relocated until demolition and other required permits have been applied for and approved by the city.

h.

A billboard may not be relocated within five hundred feet of a historic district or a public park.

i. A billboard not located on a road on the state highway system may not be relocated within three hundred fifty feet of a zoning district listed in 20.18.230.A.

j. A billboard located on a road on the state highway system may not be relocated within one hundred fifty feet of a zoning district listed in Section 20.18.230.A.

k. No new properties, such as electrical, mechanical, or LED, may be added to a relocated billboard. (For example, a non-illuminated billboard may not be converted to an illuminated billboard, and a static billboard may not be converted to a digital or tri-vision billboard.)

l. The height of a relocated billboard may not exceed forty-two and one-half feet above grade of the center point of the main-traveled way. For the purposes of this section, height is measured from the centerline of the main-traveled way closest to the sign face, at a point perpendicular to the sign location. A frontage road of a controlled access highway or freeway is not considered the main-traveled way for purposes of this subsection. In the event that the main-traveled way that is perpendicular to the sign structure is below grade, sign height will be measured from the base of the sign structure.

B.

Relocation of certain static billboards unrelated to a city public works project or city or state roadway improvement project. 1.

1.

Relocated static billboards which are unable to meet the provisions of this chapter upon relocation may be granted an exception and the receiving parcel's

dimensional and spacing requirements varied subject to a special permit granted by city council in conformance with Chapter 20.04 if the council determines that

the enforcement of the prohibition in a particular instance:

a. Is not in the best interest of the public;

b. Constitutes waste or the inefficient use of land or other resources;

c. Does not serve its intended purpose;

d. Is not effective or necessary; or

e. For any other reason the city council, after consideration of the health, safety, and welfare of the public and the equities of the situation, determines is in the best interest of the community.

2.

Relocations allowed by special permit must also comply with the following additional standards:

a. The owner of the sign and receiving parcel property owner must sign and submit a special permit application.

b. The sending site shall be used as a landscaped median, preserved open space, or park capital improvement project by the City of El Paso.

c.

The detailed site development plan required as a provision of the special permit shall include:

i. Sign elevations, including size and height of structure and square footage of all sign faces.

ii. Labeled distances to all surrounding residential zones.

iii. Labeled distances to the closest on and off-premises signs.

d. The relocation must be completed within one year from special permit approval.

C. Restrictions on relocations.

1. No billboard may be relocated into any of the special control areas identified in Section 20.18.250.

2.

A billboard must be relocated at least five hundred feet from another off-premises billboard on the same side of the roadway or highway.

3.

A relocated billboard shall not have a greater sign face area than it had at its original location, except that the sign face area of multiple relocated billboards may be combined at the new location, provided that:

a. One bulletin billboard structure shall be permitted for two existing legally permitted and erected poster billboard structures removed,

b. One poster billboard structure shall be permitted for four existing legally permitted and erected junior billboard structures removed,

c. One bulletin billboard structure shall be permitted for eight existing legally permitted and erected junior billboard structures removed;

4.

A billboard may not be relocated until demolition and other required permits have been applied for and approved by the city.

5.

A billboard may not be relocated within five hundred feet of a historic district or a public park.

6.

No new properties, such as electrical, mechanical, or LED, may be added to a relocated billboard. (For example, a non-illuminated billboard may not be converted to an illuminated billboard, and a static billboard may not be converted to a digital or tri-vision billboard.)

7. The relocated billboard shall have the necessary demolition credits and those credits shall be used to allow for relocation at the time of application to the city.

8. The height of a relocated billboard may not exceed forty-two and one-half feet above grade of the center point of the main-traveled way. For the purposes of this section, height is measured from the centerline of the main-traveled way closest to the sign face, at a point perpendicular to the sign location. A frontage road of a controlled access highway or freeway is not considered the main-traveled way for purposes of this subsection. In the event that the main-traveled way that is perpendicular to the sign structure is below grade, sign height will be measured from the base of the sign structure.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 3, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 18248, § 1, 9-23-2014; Ord. No. 18362, § 1, 6-2-2015; Ord. No. 18590, § 1, 11-1-2016)

20.18.280 - Lighting.

A. Intensity:

1. All CEVM displays shall be illuminated at a level no greater than 0.3 foot-candles over ambient light levels for the location and time and shall employ light cutoff devices such as, but not limited to, louvers in order to minimize light escaping above the horizontal plane. Foot-candle readings shall be measured at ground level at the following distances:

a. Signs between zero to one hundred square feet shall be measured at one hundred feet from the source;

b. Signs between one hundred one to three hundred square feet shall be measured at one hundred fifty feet from the source;

c. Signs between three hundred one to six hundred fifty square feet shall be measured at two hundred feet from the source;

d. Signs in excess of six hundred fifty-one square feet shall be measured at two hundred fifty from the source.

2.

As measured from the nearest residential property line, the maximum light emanation from an adjacent digital sign display shall be 0.3 foot-candles or less.

3.

A CEVM display shall be equipped with both a dimmer control and a photocell which automatically adjusts the display's intensity according to natural ambient light conditions.

4.

The CEVM display shall contain a default mechanism to show a "full black" image or turn the sign off in case of malfunction or shall be turned off within twelve hours of a reported malfunction.

B.

Operational requirements for CEVM billboards: A CEVM billboard display shall comply with the following standards:

1. The changeable images must be only a series of still images; moving images or images which create the appearance of motion during the static display period are prohibited;

2. The dwell time, defined as the interval of change between each individual message, shall be eight seconds, and a change of message must be accomplished within one second or less; The dwell time shall not include the one second or less required to change a message;

3. A CEVM billboard display shall not resemble or simulate any traffic control or other official signage;

4. A CEVM billboard display must be equipped with a light sensing device which automatically adjusts the display's intensity according to natural ambient light conditions; and

5. No CEVM billboard display shall be erected, installed or altered to include animation such as parts which move, blinking lights, sound, or smoke or fumes issuing from the sign.

6. Use of flashing, strobing, or scrolling line-travel test such as, but not limited to, "ticker- tape" is prohibited.

7. No CEVM billboard shall have a cabinet that extends beyond two inches from the operational face of the sign.

C. Existing signs. All CEVM displays, as defined, in existence prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall conform to the provisions of this subsection within one year of the adoption date of this ordinance [February 19, 2013]; provided however, that incandescent or monochrome LED signs using a single display color and which are used exclusively to display text, including time and temperature signs, shall be excluded from this requirement.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 3, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 17960, § 14, 2-19-2013)

20.18.290 - Cleanliness of billboard site.

Billboard sites shall be kept free from the accumulation of filth, weeds, graffiti, trash and all other debris.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 3, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 17960, § 15, 2-19-2013)

20.18.300 - Registration of existing billboards.

Not later than seventy calendar days after the effective date of this ordinance, the owner and, if different, operator of each billboard shall submit to the city manager or designee a complete and accurate inventory of signs erected and operational as of the effective date of this ordinance. The inventory shall identify each sign, in accordance with industry standards, and at a minimum should identify the sign by location description, latitude/longitude, type of sign (i.e. poster, junior, etc.), dimensions of the display face, orientation of the display face, current photograph of the sign, and to the extent possible Traffic Audit Bureau ("TAB") identifier. Supporting documentation for each sign, such as permits, should be provided if reasonably available. Once the inventory has been submitted in accordance with this paragraph, then the billboard signs listed in the inventory shall be considered to be legally in compliance with the Sign Code. Any billboard sign not listed on the inventory shall be in violation of this Chapter and shall be removed, unless the billboard was legally erected after the effective date of this ordinance, and complies with all provisions of this ordinance, the sign code and the E1 Paso City Code, except as otherwise provided herein. A sign properly registered under this provision need not comply with the registration requirements in Section 20.22.090.

It is the responsibility of the owner and operator to ensure that the signs submitted as part of the inventory comply with the registration provisions. However, the city will provide an opportunity for the correction of deficiencies provided that:

1. The sign inventory is submitted in a timely manner to allow the city at least thirty days to review what has been submitted.

2. If the city finds deficiencies in any submittals, the city shall notify the owner or operator and shall provide five days for the owner or operator to correct the deficiencies.

(Ord. No. 17317, § 3, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 17442, § 49, 10-26-2010; Ord. No. 17960, § 16, 2-19-2013)

20.18.310 - Temporary subdivision kiosk signs.

A. Temporary subdivision kiosk signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: Yes, as per Section 20.18.100, application requirements.

2. The owner or developer of the subdivision as platted must be the applicant for a subdivision kiosk sign. A maximum of four temporary subdivision kiosk signs will be permitted for approved and recorded subdivisions with twenty-five units or less. A maximum of six temporary subdivision kiosk signs will be permitted for approved and recorded subdivisions with fifty units or less. A maximum of eight temporary subdivision kiosk signs will be permitted for approved and recorded subdivisions with fifty units or more. All temporary subdivision kiosk signs must be spaced a minimum of two hundred feet from one another.

3. Maximum sign area: Subdivision kiosk sign structures shall be ladder type with individual sign panels of one foot (H) x four feet (W) on local and collector streets and one foot (H) x eight feet (W) on major and minor arterials and freeways and shall consist of uniform background color. Temporary subdivision kiosk signs can be double-sided. The panels may be divided in half vertically.

Dimensions of the ladder sign structure shall be as follows:

Dimensions of the ladder sign structure shall be as follows:

a. Six feet (H) × four feet (W) when the sign is located adjacent to local streets and defined by Title 19 Subdivisions.

b. Eight feet (H) × four feet (W) when the sign is located adjacent to collector streets as defined by Title 19 Subdivisions.

c. Twelve feet (H)× eight feet (W) when the sign is located adjacent to major and minor arterials and freeway as defined by Title 19 Subdivisions.

4.

Location: Temporary subdivision kiosk signs are allowed in all zoning districts but are prohibited in the special control areas listed in 20.18.250 and shall not be located on public rights of way. Temporary subdivision kiosk signs shall not obstruct city rights of way or the use of sidewalks and walkways, and shall not obstruct visibility triangles.

5. Illumination: Is permitted on major and minor arterials or freeway only as specified below:

a. Externally illuminated and must meet the dark sky ordinance.

b. Solar generated illumination is permitted.

6. Additional standards:

a. Temporary subdivision kiosk signs shall not be displayed prior to the recording of the plat.

b. All temporary subdivision kiosk signs must be removed within thirty days of the sale of the last lot to the end user in the subdivision.

c. A permit for a temporary subdivision kiosk sign may be reissued every twelve months until the last lot in the subdivision is sold to the end user.

d. The provisions of this section shall extend and apply to the City of El Paso's ETJ as per Section 20.18.020 Applicability.

7.

Design standards: Signage shall be made of plywood, metal material, or other durable material, and may consist of reflective material.

8. Maintenance standards: The applicant shall comply with the maintenance standards, per Section 20.18.120, Maintenance.

(Ord. No. 18134, § 4, 3-4-2014)

20.18.320 - Mobile billboards.

A. This section shall apply to mobile billboards operated within the corporate limits of the city and no permit shall be issued for a mobile billboard in the city, except as authorized by this section.

B. A person shall not operate a mobile billboard on the public right-of-way without obtaining a special privilege permit in accordance with Section 15.08.160 mobile billboards. A mobile billboard operator who obtains a special privilege permit shall abide by all requirements prescribed under the applicable standards in Section 15.08.160 mobile billboards.

(Ord. No. 19300, § 2, 2-15-2022)

Article IV. - On-Premises Sign Regulations

20.18.400 - General.

A.

Freestanding signs (pole signs and monument signs), shall comply with the following requirements in addition to specific requirements of the zoning district in which the sign is located, provided that the most restrictive regulation shall apply:

1. Where permitted, either pole signs or monument signs, in accordance with this chapter, shall be permitted at a premise, but not both;

2. Signs shall be located at least fifteen feet measured from the curbline and shall be contained entirely within private property lines, with no encroachment over public rights-of-way;

3. Spacing from other signs: at least fifty feet from any pole or monument sign; except that a property owner may not be denied a permit for an on- premises sign solely because the sign cannot be placed to have fifty feet between it and a freestanding sign on adjacent property;

4.

Spacing from billboards: at least fifty feet from any billboard located on the same property; except that a property owner may not be denied a permit for an on-premises sign solely because the sign cannot be placed to have fifty feet between it and a freestanding sign on adjacent property;

5. A minimum street frontage of twenty feet is required to permit a freestanding sign;

6. Signs shall be located a minimum of thirty feet from any residential district or apartment zoning districts;

7. If the base of a sign is located within fifty feet of a residential or apartment zoning district, monument or pole sign area shall not exceed forty square feet;

8. If the total sign area of a monument sign is eighty square feet or less, the sign structure width cannot exceed three times the height of the sign. The sign structure width for all other monument signs shall not be greater than the height of that sign.

9. A changeable electronic variable message sign is permitted on a primary monument sign or a primary pole sign in a C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1, M-2 and M- 3 zoning district on a minor arterial, major arterial or higher category arterial subject to the following conditions:

a. Changeable electronic variable message signs shall be in conformance with the maximum sign area requirements of Section 20.18.400.

b.

A maximum of one primary sign per premise may contain a changeable electronic variable message sign. For purposes of this section, primary sign is the sign belonging to the major or primary tenant of the commercial development. For a shopping center, the changeable electronic variable message sign shall be located on the shopping center primary monument sign only.

c. Only one changeable electronic variable message sign is permitted on each side of the primary sign with a maximum of two changeable electronic variable message signs on the primary sign.

d. Except for scrolling, rolling and animated messages, each message on a changeable electronic variable message sign shall be displayed for at least eight seconds and a change of message shall be accomplished within one second.

e. Except for scrolling rolling and animated messages, change of message on a changeable electronic variable message sign shall occur

simultaneously on the entire sign face.

f. Changeable electronic variable message signs shall not contain flashing lights as part of the display. Scrolling letters are permitted, provided that they do not exceed two lines. Animated messages are allowed, provided that the image is displayed for five seconds and if the image is changed, the change of the image is accomplished within one second.

g. Changeable electronic variable message signs may be located on either side of the roadway; however, each sign must only be visible from one direction of travel.

h. A changeable electronic variable message sign must be located at least one hundred fifty feet from the property line of any adjacent residential or apartment use.

i. A changeable electronic variable message sign is not permitted if the lot or premises has a changeable electronic variable message billboard.

j. A changeable electronic variable message sign shall not be used to display commercial messages relating to products or services that are not offered on the premises. However, the sign may display any variety or combination of non-commercial messages, including but not limited to public interest items not taking place on premises such as events for schools, amber alerts, and religious institutions.

k. A changeable electronic variable message sign shall have an automatic dimmer control to produce distinct illumination change from a higher illumination level to a lower level meeting the above illumination standards for the time period between one half-hour before sunset and one half- hour after sunrise.

l. Owner responsibilities.

1) The sign owner shall provide on the sign permit contact information for a person who is available to be contacted at any time and who is able to turn off the changeable electronic variable message sign promptly after a malfunction occurs.

2) If the development services department finds that a changeable electronic variable message has malfunctioned, the owner of the sign, within 24 hours of a written notification by the department, shall correct the malfunction or power off the sign.

3) Changeable electronic variable message signs shall display on the sign, the permit number issued by the city for the sign.

_____

m.

Maximum total sign area for signs with a changeable electronic variable message sign:

ee

0—29.9%

30—34.9%

35—39.9%

40—44.9%

45—50%

Primary Pole Sign and Primary Monument Sign—Freeway

All

All

180 160 150 140 120

Primary Pole Sign and Primary Monument Sign—Arterial

135 120 112 105 90

All

Shopping Center Primary Monument Sign—Freeway

5 acres and up 405 360 337 315 270 >5 acres 315 280 262 245 210

Shopping Center Primary Monument Sign—Arterial

1 acre and up 225 200 187 175 150 >1 acre 180 160 150 140 120

_____

10.

Changeable electronic variable message signs prior to the enactment of this ordinance. An on-premises changeable electronic variable message sign meeting the criteria below is specifically authorized by city council and specifically exempted from the provisions of this section and shall be treated as though the sign is legal nonconforming and is subject to the provisions applicable to legal nonconforming signs.

a. A city application was submitted for the sign and the sign was constructed or will be constructed in conformance with the application submitted; and

b. A city permit was issued for the sign if constructed;

c. The burden is on the sign owner to prove all of the above requirements have been met.

11.

A static changeable electronic price sign is permitted on a primary monument sign or primary pole sign in a C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, M-1, M-2 and M-3 zoning district on a minor arterial, major arterial or higher category arterial subject to the following conditions:

a. Each price digit may not exceed eighteen inches in either height or width unless the parcel is adjacent to Interstate Highway 10, U.S. Highway 54, Joe Battle Blvd. or Americas Ave. where forty-eight inch maximum height and width digits are allowed; and

b.

Characters for the product being sold shall not exceed the size of the associated price digit and shall also remain static; and

c. Each separate visual image shall remain in place for a minimum of thirty seconds.

B.

Exceptions for Sign Standards Due to Unique Circumstances.

1. Where topography, the unique characteristics of a particular lot (i.e. road alignment, curvature of the road, utility structures), or where the location or relationship of the lot to surrounding properties are such that the signage permitted on the property is not adequate the Director of the City Development Department or designee may vary the limitations as to height, size, or both for proposed signs up to twenty percent of the standards in commercial (C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4), mixed use (C-OP, C-1, P-C, P-I, R-MU, G-MU and I- MU), or apartment zone (A-I, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-M, PR-I, PR-II, SRR, A-0, A- 3/0 and S-D), except that variances shall not be granted for obstructions from any other off-premise or on-premise signs.

2.

Procedure Requirements: Applicants seeking an exception for sign standards shall provide the following information:

a. Completed sign application and fee receipt.

b.

Written request with justification for exception request.

c. Site and aerial photos documenting the unique characteristics of the lot requiring the request for this exception.

d. A three dimensional rendering of both the permitted and proposed signs from ground level from both directions of the abutting right(s)-of-way.

3. In cases where the property owner disagrees with the determination of the Director of the city development department or designee. the decision may be appealed to the city plan commission.

4. Only four signs will be granted an exception at any time on any lot or shopping center.

(Ord. 17001 §§ 3, 4, 2008; Ord. 16761 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2007)

(Ord. 17013, §§ 3, 4, 10-14-2008; Ord. 17185, § 8, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 17585, § 4, 6-14-2011; Ord. No. 17686, § 2, 12-6-2011; Ord. No. 18245, § 3, 9-16-2014; Ord. No. 18389, § 1, 7-21-2015; Ord. No. 18698, § 1, 6-27-2017)

20.18.405 - CEVM standards for superregional shopping centers.

A.

A superregional shopping center CEVMS sign is permitted as a monument sign or pole sign subject to the following conditions:

1. The property shall be zoned C-4 and located on Interstate Highway 10.

2. A maximum display face area is six hundred square feet.

3. A superregional shopping center changeable electronic variable message sign may not exceed forty-five feet in height as measured from the ground at the base of the sign.

4. A superregional shopping center CEVM sign shall be mounted on a pole that shall be encased in a structure containing architectural detail consistent with other on-site development with a base at least twenty percent of the sign width.

5. A superregional shopping center changeable electronic variable message sign is permitted only on lots that are forty acres or greater in size.

6. Only one changeable electronic variable message display is permitted on each side of the sign with a maximum of two changeable electronic variable message displays per sign.

7. Superregional shopping center changeable electronic variable message signs may be located on either side of the roadway; however, each sign must only be visible from only one direction of travel.

8. A superregional shopping center changeable electronic variable message sign shall display a static message for at least eight seconds and a change of message shall be accomplished within one second and shall occur simultaneously on the entire sign face.

9. A superregional shopping center changeable electronic variable message sign is not permitted if the lot or premises already has a changeable electronic variable message billboard or static billboard.

10.

A superregional shopping center changeable electronic variable message sign shall not be used to display commercial messages relating to products or services that are not offered on the premises. However, the sign may display any variety or combination of noncommercial messages, including but not limited to public interest items not taking place on premises such as events for schools, amber alerts, and religious institutions.

11.

A superregional shopping center changeable electronic variable message sign shall have an automatic dimmer control to produce distinct illumination change from a higher illumination level to a lower level meeting the above illumination standards for the time period between one half-hour before sunset and one half-hour after sunrise.

12. A superregional shopping center changeable electronic variable message sign is not permitted within 500 feet from R-F, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-5, P-RI, P-RII, RMH, PMD, A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-M, A-3/O, A-O, R-MU, G-MU, I-MU, and SCZ zoning districts.

13.

A maximum of two superregional shopping center changeable electronic variable message signs per premise shall be permitted on I-10 so long as the two signs are spaced at a distance of at least one thousand five hundred feet.

14.

A superregional shopping center changeable electronic variable message sign is not permitted within a special area as defined in Section 20.18.250.

15.

The Superregional shopping center changeable electronic variable message signs must be under single ownership and located on one contiguous parcel at the time of sign permit issuance.

16.

If a superregional shopping center has a changeable electronic variable message sign, all monument signs shall be eight feet or less in height or less; this limit does not apply to primary or principal shopping center signs.

17.

Superregional shopping centers with changeable variable message signs shall submit a comprehensive sign plan.

18.

Owner responsibilities:

a. The sign owner shall provide on the sign permit contact information for a person who is available to be contacted at any time and who is able to turn off the changeable electronic variable message sign promptly after a malfunction occurs.

b. If the development services department finds that a changeable electronic variable message has malfunctioned, the owner of the sign, within twelve hours of a written notification by the department, shall correct the malfunction, cause a "full black" image to be displayed, or power off the sign.

c. Changeable electronic variable message signs shall display on the sign structure the number of the permit issued by the city for the sign.

(Ord. No. 17960, § 17, 2-19-2013)

20.18.410 - R-F, R-1, R-2, R-2A, R-3, R-3A, R-4, R-5, RMH, PMD, and NOS districts.

A. Home occupation signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: no;

2. Maximum number: one per dwelling;

3.

Maximum sign area: one square foot;

4. Placement: not projecting more than two inches beyond the face of the building;

5. Illumination: not permitted;

6. Additional standards: the sign may display only onsite commercial information related to the permitted home occupation, and/or any variety or combination of non-commercial messages.

B.

Identification signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: one wall sign or one monument sign;

wk YN

Maximum sign area: twenty square feet;

3.

4. Maximum sign height: five feet for a monument sign;

5. Location:

a. Minimum of three feet from top of building and sides of building for wall signs,

b. Monument signs shall be in the front yard and shall have a minimum setback of five feet from any property line, except that such setback shall be fifteen feet where the property line is located at the curbline;

6.

Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent;

7. Additional standards: shall only be permitted for nonresidential uses, and are not permitted for a home occupation.

C. Monument signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number:

a. Properties less than four acres in size: one sign per street frontage, not to exceed two signs per premise;

b. Properties greater than four acres in size: two signs per street frontage;

3. Maximum sign area: one hundred square feet per sign;

4. Maximum sign height: ten feet;

5. Location: regardless of where the property line is located, no portion of the sign shall be closer than twenty feet from any driveway entrance or from the back of the curb line, and in all cases the entire sign must be erected within the property, and no portion of a sign shall extend beyond the

property line;

6. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent;

7. CEVM signs:

a. CEVM not permitted:

1) Properties zoned NOS;

2) Properties less than four acres in size;

b. Properties over four acres in size and not zoned NOS: CEVM limited to no more than fifty percent of sign area; held static for no less than one minute; CEVM shall be turned off from 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.; the sign face must be located at least one hundred fifty feet from the property line of any adjacent residential or apartment use.

8. Additional standards: shall comply with Section 20.18.400 of the El Paso City Code.

(Ord. 16761 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2007)

(Ord. 17185, § 9, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 17686, § 2, 12-6-2011; Ord. No. 17767, § 1, 4-17-2012; Ord. No. 18152, § 1, 4-1-2014; Ord. No. 18531, § 8, 6-28-2016; Ord. No. 18698, § 2, 6-27-2017)

20.18.420 - A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-M, PR-I, PR-II and SRR districts.

A. Home occupation signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1.

Permit required: no;

2. Maximum number: one per dwelling;

3.

Maximum sign area: one square foot;

4. Placement: not projecting more than two inches beyond the face of the building;

5. Illumination: not permitted;

6. Additional standards: shall only indicate the name and address of the occupant or a permitted home occupation.

B. Identification signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: one wall sign or one monument sign;

3.

Maximum sign area: twenty square feet;

4. Maximum height: five feet for a monument sign;

5. Location:

a. Minimum of three feet from top of building and sides of building for wall signs,

b. Monument signs shall be in the front yard and shall have a minimum setback of five feet from any property line, except that such setback shall be fifteen feet where the property line is located at the curbline;

6. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent;

7.

Additional standards: shall only be permitted for nonresidential uses or a mobile home park, and are not permitted for a home occupation.

C. Monument signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1.

Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number:

a. Properties less than four acres in size: one sign per street frontage, not to exceed two signs per premise;

b. Properties greater than four acres in size: two signs per street frontage;

3.

Maximum sign area: one hundred square feet per sign;

4. Maximum sign height: ten feet;

5.

Location: no portion of the sign shall be closer than fifteen feet from the back of the curbline; if the property line is located more than fifteen feet from the curbline, signs shall be erected within the property line, and no portion of a sign shall extend beyond the property line;

6. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent;

7. Changeable electronic variable message sign:

a. Properties less than four acres in size: CEVM not permitted;

b.

Properties greater than four acres in size: CEVM limited to no more than fifty percent of sign area; held static for no less than one minute; CEVM shall be turned off

from 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.; and the sign face must be located at least one hundred fifty feet from the property line of any adjacent residential or apartment use;

8. Additional standards: shall comply with Section 20.18.400 of the El Paso City Code.

D. Wall signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2.

Maximum number: one sign for each apartment complex per street frontage and public entryway, not to exceed four signs per complex;

3. Maximum sign area: eighty square feet per sign, including any canopies or awnings;

4. Location: shall not project more than eighteen inches from the face of the wall or the surface of the canopy or awning; shall be erected in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured and the architectural integrity of the building is not altered; shall not extend beyond the edges of

the structure;

5. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent;

6. Additional standards: only permitted for apartments in A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-M, PR-I, PR-II and SRR districts.

(Ord. 16761 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 18698, § 3, 6-27-2017)

20.18.430 - A-O, A-3/O and S-D districts.

A. Home occupation signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1.

Permit required: no;

2.

Maximum number: one per dwelling;

3.

Maximum sign area: one square foot;

4. Placement: not projecting more than two inches beyond the face of the building;

5. Illumination: not permitted;

6. Additional standards: shall only indicate the name and address of the occupant or a permitted home occupation.

B. Monument signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1.

Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number:

a. Properties less than four acres in size: one sign per street frontage, not to exceed two signs per premise;

b. Properties greater than four acres in size: two signs per street frontage;

3.

Maximum sign area: one hundred square feet per sign;

4. Maximum sign height: ten feet;

5.

Location: no portion of the sign shall be closer than fifteen feet from the back of the curbline; if the property line is located more than fifteen feet from the curbline, signs shall be erected within the property line, and no portion of a sign shall extend beyond the property line;

6. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent;

7.

CEVM signs shall be allowed by right for principal uses in these zoning districts but are not permitted for home occupations; however uses other than residential shall be subject to the following:

a. Properties less than four acres in size: CEVM not permitted;

b. Properties greater than four acres in size: CEVM limited to no more than fifty percent of sign area; held static for no less than one minute; CEVM shall be turned off from 9:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.; and the sign face must be located at least one hundred fifty feet from the property line of any adjacent residential or apartment use.

8. Additional standards: shall comply with Section 20.18.400 of the El Paso City Code.

C. Office directory signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: one wall sign per office building entry not to exceed two signs per building; monument sign or other freestanding sign is not permitted;

3.

Maximum sign area: two and one-half square feet per tenant not to exceed twenty-five square feet per building entry;

4.

Location: shall not project more than eighteen inches from the face of the wall; shall be erected in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured and the architectural integrity of the building is not altered; shall not extend beyond the edges of the structure;

5. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent.

D.

Wall signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2.

Maximum number: for nonresidential uses, one sign for each tenant in a single or multi-tenant facility per street frontage; for apartments, one sign for each apartment complex per street frontage and public entryway, not to exceed four signs per complex;

3. Maximum sign area: eighty square feet per sign, including any canopies or awnings;

4. Location: shall not project more than eighteen inches from the face of the wall or the surface of the canopy or awning; shall be erected in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured and the architectural integrity of the building is not altered; shall not extend beyond the edges of the structure;

5. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent;

6. Additional standards: only permitted for apartments and nonresidential uses in the A-O, A-3/O, and S-D districts, and are not permitted for a home occupation.

(Ord. 16761 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17686, § 2, 12-6-2011; Ord. No. 18698, § 4, 6-27-2017)

20.18.440 - C-OP, C-1, P-C, P-I, R-MU, G-MU and I-MU.

A. Monument signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: one monument sign per street frontage, not to exceed three signs per premise;

3. Maximum sign area: eighty square feet per sign;

4. Maximum sign height: ten feet;

5. Location: no portion of the sign shall be closer than fifteen feet from the back of the curbline; if the property line is located more than fifteen feet from the curbline, signs shall be erected within the property line, and no portion of a sign shall extend beyond the property line;

6. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent;

7. Additional standards: shall comply with Section 20.18.400 of the El Paso City Code.

B.

Office directory signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: one wall sign per office building entry not to exceed two signs per building; monument sign or other freestanding sign is not permitted;

3.

Maximum sign area: two and one-half square feet per tenant not to exceed twenty-five square feet per building entry;

4.

Location: shall not project more than eighteen inches from the face of the wall; shall be erected in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured and the architectural integrity of the building is not altered; shall not extend beyond the edges of the structure;

5. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent.

C.

Wall signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: one wall sign for each tenant in a single or multi-tenant facility per street frontage; for apartments, one wall sign for each apartment complex per street frontage and public entryway not to exceed four signs per complex;

3. Maximum sign area: forty percent of the building facade on each elevation, including any canopies or awnings;

4.

Location: shall not project more than eighteen inches from the face of the wall or the surface of the canopy or awning; shall be erected in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured and the architectural integrity of the building is not altered;

5. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent.

D. Perpendicular signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: Yes.

2. Maximum number: Two per street frontage or pedestrian right-of-way per building.

3. Buildings must have at least one-hundred feet of continuous street frontage or pedestrian right-of-way;

4. Maximum sign area: Thirty square feet;

5. Location: A nine-foot clearance shall be maintained between the bottom edge of the perpendicular sign and the ground; shall be placed perpendicular to the wall of the building and not project more than forty-six inches;

6.

Shall require a special privilege license to be obtained in conjunction with sign application where the sign projects into the right-of-way.

7. Illumination: Sign may be illuminated but digital/CEVM technology is not permitted;

8. Signs shall not project into Texas Department of Transportation Right-of-Way.

(Ord. 16761 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 18245, § 4, 9-16-2014)

20.18.445 - C-1 districts with special circumstances.

Properties in the C-1 zoning district that meet the following criteria shall comply with the requirements of Section 20.18.450 (C-2, C-3, C-4, Q, M-1, M-2 or M-3):

A. The property has frontage and access on a public right-of-way that is classified in the city's major thoroughfare plan (MTP) as a minor arterial or

higher; and either B or C (below);

B. The property is adjacent to and abuts property zoned C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, Q, M-1, M-2 or M-3; or

C. The property is at least one-half acre in size.

(Ord. 16761 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2007)

20.18.450 - C-2, C-3, C-4, Q, M-1, M-2 and M-3 districts.

A. Monument signs shall comply with the following requirements:

Districts Permit Maximum Number Maximum Height Maximum Sign Area Required Primary signs in C-2, C-3, C-4, Yes One per street frontage for 25 feet 150 square feet Q, M-1, M-2 and M-3 with premises less than six acres, major or super arterial but not to exceed three signs frontage (See A.1-7 after per premise; Table for additional Two per street frontage for information). premises of six acres or more, but not to exceed four signs per premise. Primary signs in C-2, C-3, C-4, Yes One per street frontage for 35 feet above ground at the 250 square feet Q, M-1, M-2 and M-3 with premises less than six acres, sign or the pavement grade of interstate or freeway frontage but not to exceed three signs the freeway, whichever is (See A.1-7 after Table for per premise; greater additional information). Two per street frontage for premises of six acres or more, but not to exceed four signs per premise.

Shopping Center primary monument signs in C-2, C-3, C-4, Q, M-1, M-2 and M-3 with arterial frontage (See A.1-7 after Table for additional information). Shopping Center primary monument signs in C-2, C-3, C-4, Q, M-1, M-2, and M-3 with interstate or freeway frontage (See A.1-7 after Table for additional information). Yes Yes One per street frontage for 45 feet premises less than three acres, but not to exceed three signs per premise; Two per street frontage for premises that are between three acres and ten acres, not to exceed four signs per premise; Three per street frontage for premises that are between ten acres and 20 acres, not to exceed six signs per premise; No more than six signs for premises between 20 acres and 40 acres; No more than eight signs for premises over 40 acres. One per street frontage for 45 feet above ground at the premises less than three sign or the pavement grade of acres, not to exceed three the freeway, whichever is signs per premise; greater Two per street frontage for premises between three acres and ten acres, not to exceed four signs per premise; Three per street frontage for premises between ten acres and 20 acres, not to exceed six signs per premise; No more than six signs per premise for premises between 20 acres and 40 acres; No more than eight signs per premise for premises over 40 acres. Less than one acre 200 square feet, More than one acre 250 square feet Less than three acres, 350 square feet; More than three acres, 450 square feet

Detached buildings in

Yes

One per detached building

25 feet

80 square feet

shopping centers in C-2, C-3,

C-4, M-1, M-2 and M-3 (See

A.1-7 after Table for

additional information).

Yes One per licensed 25 feet Combined square footage of manufacturer all manufacturer signs shall not exceed 300 square feet

Manufacturer identification

signs in C-3 and C-4, where

business inventory consists of

motorized vehicles for sale,

some in an outdoor location

that is accessible to

customers.

1. Location: No portion of the sign shall be closer than fifteen feet from the back of the curbline; if the property line is located more than fifteen feet from the curbline, signs shall be erected within the property line, and no portion of a sign shall extend beyond the property line.

2. For the purposes of this section, interstate or freeway frontage is defined as Interstate Highway 10, US Highway 54, Joe Battle Boulevard, Americas Avenue, Zaragoza Road from Joe Battle Boulevard to Sun Fire Boulevard and Montana east of Geronimo. In no case shall a freeway primary monument sign exceed fifty feet in height or a shopping center primary monument sign exceed sixty feet in height.

3.

For minor and collector arterials, a primary monument sign shall not exceed eighty square feet in sign area and eight feet in height.

4. For minor and collector arterials, a shopping center monument sign shall not exceed eighty square feet in sign area and twelve feet in height.

5. For detached buildings in shopping center signs, the height shall not exceed fifteen feet along major arterials and eight feet along a minor or collector arterial.

6. Illumination: Internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent.

7. Additional standards: Shall comply with Section 20.18.400 of the El Paso City Code.

B. Pole signs shall comply with the following requirements:

Permit Maximum Number Maximum Height Maximum Sign Area Required Yes Premises up to one acre, not 25 feet 150 square feet more than one per premise; premises greater than one acre up to six acres, not more than one per street frontage not to exceed two per premise; premises greater than six acres, not more than two per street frontage not to exceed four per premise Yes Premises up to one acre, not 35 feet above ground at the 200 square feet more than one per premise; sign or the pavement grade of premises greater than one the freeway, whichever is acre up to six acres, not more greater than one per street frontage not to exceed two per premise; premises greater than six acres, not more than two per street frontage not to exceed four per premise Yes One per detached building 25 feet 80 square feet Yes One per licensed 25 feet Combined square footage of manufacturer all manufacturer signs shall not exceed 300 square feet

Districts

Primary signs in C-2, C-3, C-4,

Q, M-1, M-2 and M-3 with

arterial frontage

Primary signs in C-2, C-3, C-4,

Q, M-1, M-2 and M-3 with

interstate or freeway frontage

Detached buildings in

shopping centers in C-2, C-3,

C-4, M-1, M-2 and M-3

Manufacturer identification

signs in C-3 and C-4, where

business inventory consists of

motorized vehicles for sale,

some in an outdoor location

that is accessible to

customers.

1. Location: No portion of the sign shall be closer than fifteen feet from the back of the curbline; if the property line is located more than fifteen feet

from the curbline, signs shall be erected within the property line, and no portion of a sign shall extend beyond the property line.

2.

For the purposes of this section, interstate or freeway frontage is defined as Interstate Highway 10, US Highway 54, Joe Battle Boulevard, and Americas Avenue only.

In no case shall a freeway primary pole sign exceed fifty feet or the height.

3. For minor and collector arterials, a primary pole sign is not permitted. Only a primary monument sign is permitted and shall not exceed eighty square feet in sign area and eight feet in height.

4. For minor and collector arterials, a shopping center pole sign is not permitted. Only a shopping center monument sign is permitted and shall not exceed eighty square feet in sign area and twelve feet in height.

5. For detached buildings in shopping center signs, the sign height shall not exceed fifteen feet along major arterial. For detached buildings in shopping center signs along minor or collector arterials, a pole sign is not permitted. Only a monument sign is permitted and shall not exceed eighty square feet in sign area and eight feet in height.

6. Illumination: Internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent;

7. Additional standards: Shall comply with Section 20.18.400 of the El Paso City Code.

C.

Office directory signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1.

Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: one wall sign per office building entry not to exceed two signs per building; monument sign or other freestanding sign is not permitted;

3.

Maximum sign area: two and one-half square feet per tenant not to exceed twenty-five square feet per building entry;

4.

Location: shall not project more than eighteen inches from the face of the wall; shall be erected in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured and the architectural integrity of the building is not altered; shall not extend beyond the edges of the structure;

5. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent.

D.

Wall signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: Yes;

2.

Maximum number: For single-tenant facility and multi-tenant facilities, any number of wall signs are permitted, provided that the combined sign area does not exceed the maximum sign area per street frontage; for apartments, one wall sign for each apartment complex per street frontage and public entryway, not to exceed four signs per complex;

3. Maximum sign area: Forty percent of the building facade on one elevation with street frontage; twenty percent of the building facade on other elevations, except where the elevation or wall is within one hundred feet of and facing a residential, apartment zoning district, or special purpose district. The sign area shall include signage on any canopies or awnings;

4. Location: Shall not project more than eighteen inches from the face of the wall or the surface of the canopy or awning; shall be erected in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured and the architectural integrity of the building is not altered.

5. Illumination: Internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent.

E.

Secondary Advertising Signs. Secondary advertising signs shall be freestanding or attached to light fixtures on private property, and shall not extend over the public right-of-way. Secondary advertising signs shall not be calculated as part of the total permitted sign area.

1. Sign Area.

a. Each secondary advertising sign shall maintain a minimum eight feet of clearance between the bottom of the sign and ground level.

b. No single secondary advertising sign shall exceed a maximum height of eight feet and width of three feet on each side of the pole.

2. Permit Required.

a. Secondary advertising signs may be used continuously so long as a valid permit has been issued and not revoked.

b. Permits shall be issued subject to installation in a manner that sign stability is ensured while in use and subject to approved engineering principles to withstand the minimum wind load requirements of the city as defined in the El Paso building code.

c. Changes in location of secondary advertising signs, even if relocated on the same property, but not including a change of the sign face, shall require a new permit.

d. Property owner's written authorization is required as part of a completed application.

3.

Spacing. A secondary advertising sign must have a minimum of twenty-nine feet spacing from any other secondary advertising sign without regard to whether another secondary advertising sign has been properly permitted by the same or another business, and whether the signs are located on the same property.

4.

Illumination. No additional illumination of any kind shall be permitted for the purpose of illuminating secondary advertising signs.

5. A maximum of two signs will be allowed per acre.

6.

Secondary advertising sign will be allowed only in commercial zoning districts, and if seventy percent or more of the business inventory for sale is in outdoor locations that are accessible to customers.

F.

Roof signs and roof-mounted signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2.

Maximum number: one sign per street frontage for single-tenant buildings, and one sign per tenant for multi-tenant buildings;

3. Minimum building height: roof signs and roof-mounted signs shall be permitted on buildings a minimum of thirty feet in height;

4.

Maximum sign area: two hundred square feet;

5. Maximum height: permitted at building height-to-sign height ratio of 3:I, with the sign not to exceed ten feet in height.

6.

Location: the sign shall not extend beyond the edges of the structure;

mn Location: the sign shall not extend beyond the edges of the structure;

7. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent;

G. Perpendicular signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: Yes.

2. Maximum number: Two per street frontage or pedestrian right-of-way per building.

WN

3. Buildings must have at least one-hundred feet of continuous street frontage or pedestrian right-of-way;

4.

Maximum sign area: Forty square feet;

5. Location: A nine-foot clearance shall be maintained between the bottom edge of the perpendicular sign and the ground; shall be placed perpendicular to the wall of the building and not project more than forty-six inches;

6.

Shall require a special privilege license to be obtained in conjunction with sign application where the sign projects into the right-of-way.

7. Illumination: Sign may be illuminated but digital/CEVM technology is not permitted;

8. Signs shall not project into Texas Department of Transportation Right-of-Way.

(Ord. 16761 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17585, §§ 5—7, 6-14-2011; Ord. No. 17721, § 1, 2-7-2012; Ord. No. 18245, §§ 5, 6, 9-16-2014; Ord. No. 18687, § 2, 5-30-2017)

20.18.455 - Shopping Center comprehensive sign plans for C-2, C-3, C-4, Q, M-1, M-2 and M-3 districts.

A. Shopping Center Comprehensive Sign Plans:

1. Shopping centers may allocate the total available square footage for all primary monument, pole, and out parcel signs permitted under this chapter according to a submitted and approved Comprehensive Sign Plan (CSP).

2. The CSP shall be reviewed by the planning division for completeness and shall not be processed until any missing information is supplied and the applicant pays the established fee. Amendments to the sign plan shall be assessed the same fee as an original CSP.

3. Administrative approval. Comprehensive sign plans shall be reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator.

4.

Comprehensive sign plans shall include the following:

a. Legal description of area proposed to be developed or metes and bounds description and amount of land included certified by a professional engineer (P.E.) or registered architect;

b. Three copies of the comprehensive sign plan, showing the boundaries of the tract proposed for development; elevations or perspective of the building; location and arrangement, use, dimensions, square footage and height of all structures; yards, setbacks (number of feet); sidewalks and curb cuts; driveways; on-site parking spaces, to include loading and unloading berths; open spaces; landscape planted areas; size, screening walls; screening of on-site parking facilities;

c. Stamp or seal and signature of a professional engineer or architect preparing plans;

d. Proof of ownership, (warranty deed, title commitment, etc.);

e. The applicant shall pay the established fee;

f. The locations, dimensions, and elevations of each sign to be located within the site.

g. A table listing each sign, its permitted size under existing zoning and standard review, and the square footage allocated to the specific sign under the comprehensive sign plan.

5.

Shopping centers submitting a comprehensive sign plan shall be eligible for one additional primary monument sign to be used for no more than two anchor tenants to be identified by the property owner.

6. All signs covered by the comprehensive sign plan shall be monument signs.

7. Signs covered by the comprehensive sign plan shall not be eligible for the exceptions under 20.18.400.B.

8. If the zoning administrator does not approve an applicant's CSP, the applicant may appeal the decision to the city plan commission. The applicant must file the appeal with the zoning administrator within fifteen business days from the date of the zoning administrator's decision. The zoning administrator shall place the appeal on the city plan commission agenda to be heard by within forty-five business days from the date the appeal was received.

9. Architecturally unique primary signs not also meeting the definition of monument sign may reduce the sign base below thirty-three percent when the CSP and sign elevations demonstrate a consistent theme across all shopping center signage and where the design of the primary signs is tied to the architecture of the primary building(s) within the shopping center.

(Ord. No. 18245, § 7, 9-16-2014)

20.18.460 - C-5 district.

A. Monument signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1.

Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: one monument sign per street frontage, not to exceed three signs per premise;

3. Maximum sign area: seventy-two square feet per sign; vertical dimension of the sign face shall not exceed eight feet;

4. Maximum sign height: twenty feet; except that thirty-five feet is permitted on property with arterial frontage;

5.

Location: no portion of the sign shall be closer than fifteen feet from the back of the curbline; if the property line is located more than fifteen feet from the curbline, signs shall be erected within the property line, and no portion of a sign shall extend beyond the property line;

6. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent;

7. Additional standards: shall comply with Section 20.18.400 of the El Paso City Code.

B.

Office directory signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: one wall sign per office building entry not to exceed two signs per building; monument sign or other freestanding sign is not permitted;

3.

Maximum sign area: two and one-half square feet per tenant not to exceed twenty-five square feet per building entry;

4.

Location: shall not project more than eighteen inches from the face of the wall; shall be erected in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured and the architectural integrity of the building is not altered; shall not extend beyond the edges of the structure;

5. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent.

C. Shingle signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: Yes.

2.

Maximum number: Four per building.

WON

3. Maximum sign area: Six square feet.

4. Location: No portion of the bottom edge of the shingle sign shall be more than two feet below the edge of the canopy; no portion of the shingle sign shall not extend beyond the edge of the canopy; shall maintain an eight-foot clearance shall be maintained between the bottom edge of the shingle sign and the ground; shall be placed perpendicular to the front wall of the building and not project more than twenty-four inches over public rights-of- way.

5. Illumination: Not permitted.

6. Additional standards: Only permitted for business identification.

7. Shingle signs are not permitted along any building face where a perpendicular sign is also present.

D. Store front signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: one per ground floor tenant within a multi-tenant building;

3. Maximum sign area: thirty-two square feet;

4. Location: shall not project more than eighteen inches from the face of the wall; shall be erected in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured and the architectural integrity of the building is not altered; shall not extend beyond the edges of the structure and shall only be located no higher than the ground floor level;

5. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent;

6. Additional standards: shall be included as part of the calculation for the maximum wall sign area permitted for the building.

E.

Wall signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: no maximum;

3. Maximum sign area: no maximum;

4. Location: shall not project more than eighteen inches from the face of the wall or the surface of the canopy or awning; shall be erected in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured and the architectural integrity of the building is not altered; shall not extend beyond the vertical edges of the structure; sign may extend beyond the roof line or parapet up to fifty percent of the total square footage of the sign. Any sign extending beyond the roof line or parapet is permitted to do so only in the case of single channel letters or logos. Rectangular traditional cases, back lit or not, may not extend beyond the roof line or parapet.

5. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent.

F.

Perpendicular signs shall comply with the following requirements:

Perpendicular signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: Yes;

2.

Maximum number: For buildings with less than fifty feet of continuous street frontage or pedestrian right-of-way, one per street frontage. Buildings with greater than fifty feet of continuous frontage or pedestrian right-of-way may receive one additional sign per ground floor tenant.

3.

Shall be permitted only on building facades fronting a public street, where no parking shall be located between the building facade and the right-of- way.

4.

Maximum sign area: Twenty-five square feet.

5.

Location: A ten-foot clearance shall be maintained between the bottom edge of the perpendicular sign and the ground; the sign shall not be above the second story; shall be placed perpendicular to the wall of the building and not project more than forty-six inches over public rights-of-way.

6. Sign may be illuminated but digital/CEVM technology is not permitted.

oN

7. Additional standards: Only permitted for business identification on buildings two-stories in height or greater.

8. Shall require a special privilege license to be obtained in conjunction with sign application where the sign projects into the right-of-way.

9.

The sign shall be erected or mounted in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured, the architectural integrity of the building is not altered, and that no architectural features, shall be obscured or destroyed.

10. Signs shall not project into Texas Department of Transportation ROW.

G.

Roof Signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: Yes.

2.

Maximum number: Two per street frontage or pedestrian right-of-way per building, except that additional signs up to one per tenant may be approved by the director of city development where multiple tenants occupy the required one hundred feet of required street frontage.

3.

Buildings must be street oriented and have at least one hundred feet of continuous street frontage or pedestrian right-of-way;

4. Maximum sign area: One hundred square feet per sign;

No WF

5. Illumination: Sign may be illuminated but digital/CEVM technology is not permitted;

6. Shall require a special privilege license to be obtained in conjunction with sign application where the sign encroaches into the right-of-way.

7. Signs shall not project into Texas Department of Transportation Right-of-Way.

(Ord. 16761 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17546, §§ 2, 3, 5-3-2011; Ord. No. 18043, § 1, 7-16-2013; Ord. No. 18245, § 8, 9-16-2014; Ord. No. 18460, § 1, 1-12-2016)

20.18.465 - Civic and cultural district signs.

Civic and cultural district signs are not subject to the sign regulations of the base zoning district.

1. Permit required: yes.

2. Location: these signs should be located within the boundaries of the civic and cultural district boundary as defined in Section 20.10.146.

3. Off-premises advertising shall be prohibited.

4. All CEVM displays shall be illuminated at a level no greater than 0.3 foot-candles over ambient light levels for the location and time.

5. A CEVM display shall be equipped with both a dimmer control and a photocell which automatically adjusts the display's intensity according to natural ambient light conditions.

6. The CEVM display shall contain a default mechanism to show a "full black" image, or turn the sign off in case of malfunction, or be repaired, within twelve hours of receiving a written notification from the city of a malfunction.

7.

The CEVM shall not resemble or simulate any traffic control or other official signage.

8. The use of flashing, strobing lights on the CEVM or any portion of the frame or mounting structure is prohibited.

9.

The sign owner shall provide on the sign permit the contact information of a person who is available at all times and who is able to turn off any changeable electronic variable message sign promptly after a malfunction occurs.

(Ord. No. 18135, § 2, 3-4-2014; Ord. No. 019578, § 5, 12-12-2023)

20.18.470 - U-P district.

A. Monument signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: one monument sign per street frontage, not to exceed two signs per premise;

3.

Maximum sign area: eighty square feet;

4. Maximum sign height: ten feet;

5. Location: no portion of the sign shall be closer than fifteen feet from the back of the curbline; if the property line is located more than fifteen feet from the curbline, signs shall be erected within the property line, and no portion of a sign shall extend beyond the property line;

6. Illumination: may be directly or internally illuminated with the light source not visible from the adjacent street or public right-of-way. No flashing or intermittent illumination shall be permitted;

7. Additional standards: shall comply with the Union Plaza architectural and design guidelines; shall apply only to new construction in the U-P district.

B.

Office directory signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: one wall sign per office building entry not to exceed two signs per building;

3. Maximum sign area: two and one-half square feet per tenant not to exceed twenty-five square feet per building entry;

4.

Location: shall not project more than eighteen inches from the face of the wall; shall be erected in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured and the architectural integrity of the building is not altered; shall not extend beyond the edges of the structure;

5. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent;

6. Additional standards: shall only be permitted as a wall sign; shall comply with the Union Plaza architectural and design guidelines; shall apply only to new construction in the U-P district.

C. Shingle signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2.

Maximum number: four per building;

3. Maximum sign area: six square feet;

4. Location: no portion of the bottom edge of the shingle sign shall be more than two feet below the edge of the canopy; no portion of the shingle sign shall extend beyond the edge of the canopy; an eight-foot clearance shall be maintained between the bottom edge of the shingle and the ground; shall be placed perpendicular to the front wall of the building and not project more than twenty-four inches over public rights-of-way;

5. Illumination: not permitted;

6. Additional standards: shall comply with the Union Plaza Architectural and Design Guidelines.

D. Wall signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: one sign per street frontage for single-tenant buildings, and one sign per tenant for multi-tenant buildings;

3. Maximum sign area: ten percent of the building facade for single-tenant buildings on each elevation, including any canopies or awnings. For multi- tenant buildings, the sum total area of all signs shall not exceed ten percent of the building facade on each elevation, including any canopies or awnings.

4. Location: shall not project more than eighteen inches from the face of the wall or the surface of the canopy or awning; shall be erected in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured and the architectural integrity of the building is not altered; shall not extend beyond the vertical edges of the structure; sign may extend beyond the roof line or parapet up to 50 percent of the total square footage of the sign. Any sign extending beyond the roof line or parapet is permitted to do so only in the case of single channel letters or logos. Rectangular traditional cases back lit or not, may not extend beyond the roof line or parapet.

5. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent;

6. Additional standards: shall comply with the Union Plaza Architectural and Design Guidelines; shall apply only to new construction in the U-P district.

E.

Perpendicular signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: Yes;

2.

Maximum number: One per street frontage or pedestrian right-of-way per building. Buildings must have at least ninety feet of continuous street frontage or pedestrian right-of-way and must be at least two stories in height;

3.

Shall be permitted only on building facades fronting public rights-of-way, where no parking shall be located between the building facade and the right- of-way;

4. Maximum sign area: Twenty-five square feet;

5.

Location: A ten-foot clearance shall be maintained between the bottom edge of the perpendicular sign and the ground; the sign shall not be above the second story; shall be placed perpendicular to the wall of the building and not project more than forty-six inches over public rights-of-way;

6.

Illumination: Sign may be illuminated but digital/CEVM technology is not permitted;

ND

7. Additional standards: Only permitted for business identification.

8. Shall require a special privilege license to be obtained in conjunction with sign application where the sign projects into the right-of-way.

9. The sign shall be erected or mounted in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured, the architectural integrity of the building is not altered, and that no architectural features, historic fabric, fine ornaments, or distinctive or unique carvings shall be obscured, damaged, altered or destroyed, unless otherwise approved by the El Paso Historic Landmark Commission.

10. Signs shall not project into Texas Department of Transportation Right-of-Way.

(Ord. 16909 § 1 (part), 2008; Ord. 16761 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 18043, §§ 2, 3, 7-16-2013)

20.18.480 - Historic overlay zones, historic districts and designated significant landmarks.

A. Home occupation signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: no;

2. Maximum number: one per dwelling;

3.

Maximum sign area: one square foot;

4. Placement: no portion of the sign shall project more than two inches beyond the face of the building;

5.

Illumination: not permitted;

5. Illumination: not permitted;

6. Additional standards: shall only indicate the name and address of the occupant or a permitted home occupation.

B. Monument signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: one monument sign per premise;

3. Maximum sign area: thirty square feet in C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, Q, M-1, M-2, M-3, G-MU and I-MU districts; ten square feet in all other districts;

4. Maximum sign height: three feet in all districts, except six feet in C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, Q, M-1, M-2, M-3, G-MU and I-MU districts;

5.

Location: no portion of the sign shall be closer than fifteen feet from the back of the curbline; if the property line is located more than fifteen feet from the curbline, signs shall be erected within the property line, and no portion of a sign shall extend beyond the property line;

6. Illumination: indirect only; may not be flashing or intermittent;

7. Additional standards: the sign may display only onsite commercial information related to the permitted home occupation, and/or any variety or combination of non-commercial messages.

C. Wall signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: one sign for each street frontage per landmark structure or site for single-tenant buildings and one sign for each storefront for multi-tenant buildings;

3. Maximum sign area: thirty square feet in C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, Q, M-1, M-2, M-3, G-MU and I-MU districts; ten square feet in all other districts.

4. Location: shall not project more than eighteen inches from the face of the wall or the surface of the canopy or awning; shall be erected in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured and the architectural integrity of the building is not altered; shall not extend beyond the edges of the structure; shall not be higher than the window sill of the second story, shall be a minimum of three feet from the top and sides of the building; shall not cover any character defining architectural features or elements;

5. Illumination: indirect only; may not be flashing or intermittent;

D.

6. Additional standards: shall only be for a nonresidential use, and are not permitted for a home occupation; administrative review approval is required from the development services department in accordance with Chapter 20.20 (Historic Landmark Preservation) prior to the issuance of a permit. Perpendicular signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: Yes.

2.

Maximum number: One per street frontage or pedestrian right-of-way per building. Buildings must have at least ninety feet of continuous street frontage or pedestrian right-of-way and must be at least two stories in height.

3. Shall be permitted only on building facades fronting a public street, where no parking shall be located between the building facade and the right-of- way.

4. Maximum sign area: Twenty-five square feet.

5. Location: A ten-foot clearance shall be maintained between the bottom edge of the perpendicular sign and the ground; the sign shall not be above the second story; shall be placed perpendicular to the wall of the building and not project more than forty-six inches over public rights-of-way.

6. Sign may be illuminated but digital/CEVM technology is not permitted.

7. Additional standards: Only permitted for business identification.

8. Shall require a special privilege license to be obtained in conjunction with sign application where the sign projects into the right-of-way.

9. The sign shall be erected or mounted in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured, the architectural integrity of the building is not altered, and that no architectural features, historic fabric, fine ornaments, or distinctive or unique carvings shall be obscured, damaged, altered or destroyed, unless otherwise approved by the El Paso Historic Landmark Commission.

10. Signs shall not project into Texas Department of Transportation ROW.

E. All signs are subject to review by the El Paso Historic Landmark Commission for a certificate of appropriateness.

F. For performing arts centers and related buildings located in the C-5/H district (Central Business District/Historic):

The historic landmark commission shall have the authority to issue a certificate of appropriateness for signage, including, but not limited to, marquees, wall signs, perpendicular signs, and poster boxes exceeding thirty square feet and made of materials that complement the style of the structure and attributed to the era in which the building was constructed based on the historic character and architectural significance of the building.

G. For buildings within the C-5/H district (Central Business District/Historic) and within the boundary of the El Paso Downtown 2015 Plan where the purpose will serve a greater public good, further specific redevelopment goals outlined in the 2015 Plan and contribute to the economic redevelopment of the downtown area:

The historic landmark commission shall have authority to issue a certificate of appropriateness for wall signs exceeding thirty square feet, to a maximum of five percent of the face area of the elevation of the building on which the sign is to be placed, and for location of wall signs higher than the window sill of the second story. Any such sign shall be made of materials that complement the style of the structure and attributed to the era in which the building was constructed based on the historic character and architectural significance of the building.

(Ord. 16909 § 1 (part), 2008; Ord. 16761 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2007)

(Ord. 17185, § 10, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 17546, § 4, 5-3-2011)

20.18.490 - Additional on-premises signs.

A. Auxiliary signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: four;

3. Maximum sign area: ten square feet per sign;

4. Maximum sign height: three feet for freestanding auxiliary signs;

5. Location:

a. Freestanding auxiliary signs, no portion of the sign shall be closer than fifteen feet from the back of the curbline; if the property line is located more than fifteen feet from the curbline, signs shall be erected within the property line, and no portion of a sign shall extend beyond the property line,

b. Wall auxiliary signs, no portion shall not project more than eighteen inches from the face of the wall or the surface of the canopy or awning; shall be erected in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured and the architectural integrity of the building is not altered; shall not extend beyond the edges of the structure;

6. Illumination: not permitted.

B. Awning and canopy signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: one per awning or canopy per premise;

3. Maximum sign area: shall be included in the maximum wall sign area calculation permitted for all wall signs, thirty-six square feet or fifty percent of the awning face area, whichever is less;

4. Maximum height: not higher than the roofline of the building to which the awning or canopy is attached;

5. Location: sign shall be mounted upon or atop the associated canopy or awning;

6. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent;

7. Permitted districts: only permitted in U-P or C-5 districts and for gasoline stations where permitted; tenants in the C-5 district are permitted a storefront sign or awning and canopy sign, but not both.

C. Building marker signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1.

Permit required: no;

2.

Maximum number: one per building;

3.

Maximum sign area: two square feet;

4. Maximum sign height: two feet;

5. Location: no portion of the sign shall project more than two inches beyond the face of the building;

6. Illumination: indirect;

7. Permitted districts: all.

D. Community service signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: two per street frontage, not to exceed four per premise;

3. Maximum sign area: thirty-two square feet;

4. Maximum sign height: eight feet;

5. Location: on walls, fences or freestanding signs, and no portion of the sign shall extend beyond the property line;

6. Illumination: not permitted;

7. Permitted districts: all;

8. Additional standards: not more than twenty percent of sign area may include advertising of the name, logo, phone number or address of the sponsoring company; a minimum of twenty feet spacing from any other monument or freestanding sign.

E. Marquee signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2. Maximum number: one per street frontage;

3. Maximum sign area: shall be included in the maximum wall sign area calculation permitted for all wall signs;

4. Location: attached to the building, and if extends onto city property or city rights-of-way as authorized by a special privilege license or as otherwise authorized by the city;

5. Illumination: internal or indirect; may not be flashing or intermittent;

6. Permitted districts: commercial districts.

F.

Subdivision identification signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1.

Permit required: yes;

2.

Maximum number: two per subdivision entrance;

3. Maximum sign area: fifty square feet per sign;

4. Maximum sign height: five feet;

5. Location: the location of subdivision identification signs shall be subject to the approval of the building official; no portion of a subdivision identification sign shall be within a public right-of-way or public easement, except where authorized by special privilege license granted by city council; a copy of the restrictive covenants or other documentation, recorded in the El Paso County real property records, shall be submitted with the sign application which creates a neighborhood association or other entity which shall provide for the perpetual maintenance of the sign if proposed to be located within a public right-of-way or public easement, or imposes a duty of maintenance of the sign on the property owner on which the sign is located;

6. Illumination: internal or indirect, may not be flashing or intermittent;

7. Additional standards: shall only be a monument sign and only include the name, logo or other identification of the subdivision.

G.

Menu signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: no, if installed and inspected with the installation of additional signage on the property. A permit is required if the only signed installed on the property is the menu sign;

2. Maximum number: two;

WoN

3. Maximum sign area: thirty-two square feet per sign;

4. Maximum sign height: eight feet;

5. Location: The location of the menu sign shall be subject to the approval of the building official based on building code requirements, safety and traffic flow considerations; however, the sign is strictly for on-site informational purposes and, therefore, shall be oriented so as to not be readable from the fronting public street.

(Ord. 16761 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2007)

(Ord. 17185, § 11, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 18698, § 5, 6-27-2017)

20.18.500 - Temporary on-premises signs.

A. Temporary real estate signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: no;

2. Maximum number: no maximum, a minimum of fifty feet is required between each sign;

3. Maximum sign area: thirty-two square feet for C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, Q, M-1, M-2 and M-3 districts; six square feet for all other districts, exclusive of two riders not in excess of an area of six inches by thirty inches each;

4.

Maximum sign height: ten feet for C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, Q, M-1, M-2 and M-3 districts; six feet for all other districts;

5. Location: not less than three feet from public property and not less than thirteen feet from the curb;

6. Illumination: not permitted;

7. Permitted districts: all;

8. Additional standards: shall only be for the purposes of sale, lease or rent of the property; shall be removed within fourteen days of sale or lease.

B. Temporary construction signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1.

Permit required: no;

1. Permit required: no;

2.

Maximum number: one sign per street frontage, not to exceed two signs per premise;

a

3. Maximum sign area: sixty-four square feet for C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, Q, M-1, M-2 and M-3 districts; thirty-two square feet for all other districts;

4. Maximum sign height: sixteen feet for C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, Q, M-1, M-2 and M-3 districts; eight feet for all other districts;

5. Location: not less than three feet from public property and not less than thirteen feet from the curb;

Illumination: not permitted;

6.

IIlumination: not permitted;

7.

Permitted districts: all;

8. Additional standards: only permitted at construction sites and must be removed within thirty days after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the last permit of the project on the same property.

C. Temporary portable signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: yes;

2.

Maximum number: one per premises for property less that one acre; two per premises for property one acre to five acres; three signs per premises for property greater than five acres;

3. Maximum sign height: seven feet for C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, Q, M-1, M-2 and M-3 districts;

4. Location: no portion of the sign shall be closer than fifteen feet from the back of the curbline; if the property line is located more than fifteen feet from the curbline, signs shall be erected within the property line, and no portion of a sign shall extend beyond the property line; on corner lots, portable signs shall not be located in the area of a triangle formed by the intersecting property lines and a diagonal line joining the property lines at points twenty feet from their intersection;

5. Illumination: not permitted;

6. Permitted districts: C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, Q, M-1, M-2 and M-3 districts; not permitted on property within historic overlay zones, historic districts or with designated significant landmarks;

7. Additional standards: portable signs shall comply with the following:

a. Maximum duration of a display at any one time shall be limited to three hundred sixty-five consecutive days,

b. Minimum of thirty days between permitted displays,

c. Portable signs shall be placed a minimum of fifteen feet from any driveway,

d. Portable signs shall be placed a minimum of three hundred feet spacing from any other portable sign,

e. Portable signs may be placed immediately adjacent to or not closer than fifty feet away from any freestanding sign,

f. Property owner's name and written evidence that the property owner has authorized the placing of the sign(s) on his property.

D. Temporary banner signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1.

Permit required: no;

2.

Maximum number: one sign for each tenant in a single- or multi-tenant facility per street frontage; for apartments, one sign for each apartment complex per street frontage and public entryway not to exceed four signs per complex;

3.

Maximum sign area: one hundred square feet which is included in the maximum wall sign area calculation permitted for all wall signs;

4. Location: shall be securely attached to a building facade, masonry wall, or fence; shall be erected in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured and the architectural integrity of the building is not altered; shall not extend beyond the edges of the structure no portion shall extend beyond the roof plane or outside the building envelope when attached to a building;

5. Illumination: not permitted;

6. Permitted districts: C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, Q, M-1, M-2 and M-3; only for apartments in A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-O, A-3/O, A-M, PR-I, PR-II and SRR districts; not permitted on property within historic overlay zones, historic districts or with designated significant landmarks;

7. Additional standards: limited to thirty days only with a minimum of thirty days between displays; shall only be for the purposes of grand openings or other types of special events on the property;

E. Temporary inflatable signs:

1. Shall be installed by a licensed business as provided under Title 5 (Business, Taxes, Licenses and Regulations);

2.

Shall require business to apply, obtain and pay for a sign permit for each display;

3. A display shall be for a prescribed time period using the same device at a designated location on a lot;

4. Maximum of one sign per lot at any one time;

5. Limited to property zoned C-1 (commercial), C-2 (commercial), C-3 (commercial), C-4 (commercial), M-1 (light manufacturing), M-2 (heavy manufacturing) and M-3 (unrestricted manufacturing);

6. Height of sign shall be limited to no more than the height permitted for freestanding signs on the lot;

7. Sign to be displayed for a cumulative total of no more than one hundred twenty days during any one calendar year;

8. Maximum duration of a display at any one time shall be limited to thirty consecutive days;

9. Minimum of seven days between permitted displays;

10.

Location of sign shall not restrict traffic visibility onto any portion of the street frontage;

11. No sign shall be located within twenty-five feet of any high voltage electrical overhead conductor (power line);

12.

Sign shall be properly secured to its moorings and other anchoring devices in accordance with applicable provisions of the Recommended Industry Minimum Standards outlined by the Inflatable Advertising Dealers Association as determined by the building official;

13.

Sign shall not block any interior trapdoor or scuttle cover that leads to the roof of a building, block any ingress into the building, obstruct any fire lane or fire protection apparatus, including but not limited to, fire hydrants and other fire protection connections.

F.

Temporary active motion inflatable signs:

. Temporary active motion inflatable signs:

1. Permit: no;

2. Maximum of four signs per lot at any one time;

3. Signs shall be properly maintained in a safe condition at all times without ripping, tearing or other holes;

4. Sign shall be properly secured to its moorings and other anchoring devices in accordance with applicable provisions of the Recommended Industry Minimum Standards outlined by the Inflatable Advertising Dealers Association as determined by the building official; and

5. Sign shall not block any interior trapdoor or scuttle cover that leads to the roof of a building, block any ingress into the building, obstruct any fire lane or fire protection apparatus, including, but not limited to, fire hydrants and other fire protection connections.

G.

Temporary real estate banner signs. Temporary real estate banner signs shall comply with the following requirements:

1. Permit required: No;

2.

Maximum number: One sign per street frontage:

3. Maximum sign area: One hundred square feet which is included in the maximum wall sign area calculation permitted for all wall signs;

4. Location: Shall be securely attached to a building facade, shall be erected in such a manner that building fenestration is not obscured and the architectural integrity of the building is not altered; shall not extend beyond the edges of the structure no portion shall extend beyond the roof plane or outside the building envelope;

5. Illumination: Not permitted;

6. Permitted districts: C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, C-5, Q, M-1, M-2 and M-3; only for apartments in A-1, A-2, A-3, A-4, A-O, A-3/O, A-M, PR-I, PR-II and SRR districts; not permitted on property within historic overlay zones, historic districts or with designated significant landmarks.

(Ord. 16761 § 1 (Exh. A) (part), 2007)

(Ord. No. 17686, § 2, 12-6-2011; Ord. No. 18134, § 5, 3-4-2014)

Article V. - Noncommercial Sign Regulations

20.18.510 - Noncommercial messages and message substitution.

A. Message substitution. A noncommercial message which is within the protection of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution may be substituted, in whole or in part, for any message on any sign authorized by this chapter. Message substitution is a continuing right which may be exercised any number of times. No permit is required for such message substitution, unless there is a change in the physical structure of the sign displaying the message. This provision does not authorize the substitution of an offsite commercial message in place of an onsite commercial message.

B. Noncommercial messages. In addition to the noncommercial messages which may be displayed by message substitution, any noncommercial message within the protection of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution may be displayed on any parcel and at any time, subject to the following:

a. Maximum area cannot be greater than thirty-six square feet; and

b. Cannot be more than eight feet high; and,

c.

Cannot be illuminated or have moving elements; and,

d.

Are not prohibited by Section 20.18.140.

e. Permit required only when the sign qualifies as a "structure" under the building code.

(Ord. 17185, § 12, 9-1-2009; Ord. No. 17686, § 2, 12-6-2011)

Chapter 20.20 - HISTORIC LANDMARK PRESERVATION

20.20.010 - Declaration of policy.

A. The city council finds and declares as a matter of public policy that the protection, enhancement, preservation and use of historic landmarks is a public necessity and is required in the interest of the culture, prosperity, education, safety and general welfare of the people. The purposes of this chapter include the following but are not limited to:

B. To protect, enhance and perpetuate historic landmarks which represent or reflect distinctive and important elements of the city's, region's, state's or nation's architectural, archaeological, cultural, social, economic, ethnic and political history and to develop appropriate settings for such places;

C. To safeguard the city's historic and cultural heritage, as embodied and reflected in such historic landmarks by appropriate regulations;

D. To stabilize and improve property values in such locations;

E. To foster civic pride in the bea